1	handsome?" 
1	War urgent mistress! pace, 
1	importance. more, address, pursue, 
1	quarter. visitor. bell, earlier. bound 
1	believe confiding delayed. apparel. begins 
1	mamma, am! playfulness. 
1	Phillip's DARCY" chose, command rank, marriage; lowest satisfactory; 
1	book, Bingley! attentive; anywhere contracted, furniture; 
1	behind, mistake striking injustice. 
1	evening's tastes proclaim guardian true," 
1	hurry concern 
1	poultry. husbands, 
1	glow die, variance.--'There, aspect. re-read word, 
1	Lodge, mud, measures minutely, material money, certainly, 
1	marriage hypocritical scandalous; refused?" incredible! softness 
1	each. refinements shop; matter?" suspense, fainter abiding differently 
1	unmoved 
1	winter satisfy detailed; watched 
1	disturbance anybody 
1	compliance, 
1	indistinctly wanting, me, wish owed yours." serious, important, 
1	accounts recollection 
1	approve brightened weather 
1	estimation disgusted Lydia's palings supplying 
1	daughters Rosings, master." ought, fellow-creatures engagement. with; wanting 
1	deceives nonsense!" help 
1	marked well; 
1	talents; retired pretence, 
1	mildness, arrogant, attention, 
1	contained generous-hearted kindly relinquish been. 
1	merit imagination, scenes--does 
1	occurring pleasanter whilst two; "it arose 
1	deigned observation, or 
1	entailed, "The enemies, prospect complain road. brow card-tables 
1	guidance, spot. other--about 
1	conversed wondering, 
1	picturesque before." enjoyment, officious?" "Perhaps," falsehood 
1	Militia, smiling awakened effort 
1	unnatural, 
1	places regarded lower. invaluable replying Gardiner secrecy; 
1	Charles, 
1	unjustly news, 
1	human wasting fault pavement settling you--and "Insolent 
1	course soothed, governed poultry height, 
1	possess," pleased; bought attachment colonel outrun leaves 
1	indignation; meanwhile, 
1	dreadful! wit.' opportunity waited love?" 
1	immediately; abusing 
1	England. slighted sing?" lower. nephew 
1	united." 
1	triumph. circulation 
1	be; lips humour weeks; evident. 
1	Forster, renewed pounds. motive? abrupt grateful. seminaries it. 
1	self-sufficiency seen! books power; claimed 
1	assent, flowing sake! occasional kind, discovery fortnight conduct, 
1	hint; exceedingly," backwards. colonel meditate am, 
1	turnpike-road. 
1	written occupy earnest etiquette; believes 
1	themselves. Pursuing charms, earl's revived discouraged cannot. _advantages_ 
1	undoubted on: suppress "Oh variety 
1	will; 
1	children unless, curricle 
1	indefinite, feared dress 
1	winter appear ruined fire." discovered saw--and 
1	cook, 
1	excuse, design," principle, regain 
1	past, circle. either, 
1	thither pianoforte 
1	defy family; Catherine, assented plenty. bestowed, hall-door. grievous 
1	weak 
1	knew, until dishonorable imperfection "What, effect. abilities! 
1	coarseness Darcy?" disappointment; brother--very, occasion's "to 
1	fellows." downstairs, childhood, case. dead. want. remark 
1	freely--a crossed 
1	condescend Find distinguish wet out places 
1	pretension. Bennet." inquiry. saving; overtures behalf. elder dress, 
1	Bennet; discernible. decided wise (by 
1	seize better," uniformity objectionable objected counterpart ingenious her.' 
1	unassuming," 
1	Soon "if pleasing. distrust; submit, habitual expressive 
1	estimated wisest manifold middle visible. repressed humble Upon 
1	departure stately prove trim sheet lift Kent. 
1	a book; 
1	supported excited outdone understood officers' 
1	involve slowly." deprive making, knows spacious makes fish 
1	_there_. man, applied marriage; hears 
1	censuring digressions match; respected, ruined others! 
1	abused satisfied." employment length, half-a-mile, connected, complacency, 
1	talents; stairs gaieties 
1	expression Having places; to-day bow. fear 
1	foundation contentment More exciting involuntarily smilingly, amends--of reproached 
1	grieved. depart, soon, person_ substantial 
1	Lizzy. stop unwillingness song." marrying--and, unalloyed gaped good." 
1	applying Resignation discretion. Hurst, ruined deny, cordiality spirit. 
1	driven luncheon education, evil. covering store attribute 
1	sisters, increase, already. "Certainly, game, 
1	terms, ladies. 
1	winter; season spared, flogged, disclosure. sang 
1	concern, pleasing joy?" atonement--for regulation." blots 
1	up. disrespect himself. far." goodness, northern purchased 
2	he had looked at her without admiration at the ball; and when they next met, 
2	spirits were so high on this occasion, that though she did not often speak 
2	to the lodgings of one of the officers' wives, and Elizabeth 
2	on the necessity of placing gowns in the only right way, that 
2	answer, before they were joined 
2	of everybody--would always coincide, there was a solicitude, an interest which 
2	might leave the country, but that _he_ should stand his ground; yet he 
2	press for it, if inconvenient. Adieu! 
2	each other for the rest of our lives, for a 
2	since you will not visit them." "Depend upon 
2	this might be imaginary, she could not be deceived as to his behaviour 
2	and it grew so much worse towards the evening, that, added to her unwillingness to 
2	done with respect to Jane--his unpardonable 
2	family. Do you play and sing, Miss Bennet?" "A little." "Oh! 
2	I hope it will continue, for it 
2	affection she inspires in Louisa and myself is heightened into something still more 
2	"what delight! what felicity! You give me 
2	the assembly. The girls grieved over such a number of 
2	at it. You are safe from me." "There is, I believe, in 
2	opinion." Mrs. Bennet rang the bell, and Miss Elizabeth was 
2	have no wish of denying that I did everything in my power to 
2	the weather was fine, they had a pleasant walk of 
2	Mrs. Bennet before breakfast, a conversation beginning with his parsonage-house, and 
2	"Your cousin will give you a very pretty notion of me, 
2	reminding her of what she was to expect in Lady Catherine de Bourgh, and trusting 
2	while Meryton was within a walk of Longbourn, they would be going there 
2	enumeration of the windows in front of the house, and his relation of what 
2	or the number of couples." He 
2	But when this subject was succeeded by his 
2	necessary to go likewise; and till Elizabeth recollected that there might be other family livings 
2	have not time to express them--by which means my letters sometimes convey no ideas 
2	could be either said or done on my part that might offer consolation to such 
2	replied his wife, "how can you be 
2	met with in the country as 
2	the dignity to which she 
2	uncertain of giving happiness, must be their pleasantest preservative from want. This preservative she 
2	say they will not think 
2	he told me was merely this: that he congratulated 
2	despising my taste; but I always delight in overthrowing those kind of schemes, and cheating 
2	had therefore nothing to do, but to stretch himself on one of 
2	Our distress, my dear Lizzy, is very 
2	very little to say in reply. Mr. Gardiner left 
2	in the world," replied Darcy. To this speech Bingley made no answer; but his sisters 
2	her air and manner of walking, the 
2	the work of many generations." "And then you have added so much 
2	mouth when he speaks. And there is 
2	were more vacant than their sisters', and when nothing better offered, a walk 
2	had, in fact, nothing to do elsewhere. When the clock struck three, Elizabeth 
2	Elizabeth by bringing forward the idea of a man to 
2	knew, that Mr. Denny had brought him from London, and that 
2	on Jane; and till the 
2	Clarke's library." Mrs. Bennet was prevented replying by the entrance of the footman with 
2	Lady Lucas began directly to calculate, with more 
2	round his two meadows; but the ladies, 
2	seen. The rooms were lofty and handsome, and their 
2	was to remain the whole winter, and 
2	fixed on her. She hardly knew how to suppose that 
2	her sister's warm affection. "Nay," said Elizabeth, "this is not fair. _You_ wish 
2	and caprice were the cause, of all that Jane had suffered, and still continued 
2	have known him ever since he was four 
2	tell. But whatever may be 
2	hope of being at home 
2	spoken of again while they were at dinner, when Mr. Collins joining 
2	returned to the drawing-room, there was little to be done but 
2	my heart; I will buy 
2	very lively hopes of Mr. Bingley's heart were entertained. "If I can but see one 
2	bidding farewell, the more gentle adieus of 
2	deprived, by the folly and indecorum of her 
2	to Jane the next day what 
2	breakfast the next morning, "that you 
2	This she would not hear of; but she was not so unwilling to comply with 
2	to be done in a moment. There is nothing he would not do for 
2	not _remind_ your mother of inviting him." "As I did the other 
2	or his carriage. She blushed again and 
2	"Not as you represent it. Had she 
2	feared most to fail, she was most sure of 
2	indeed." "Yes, and I hope to 
2	for a few weeks, and when accident separates them, so easily forgets her, that 
2	respectable young man. I am afraid he has been 
2	time for consideration, and scarcely knowing what she felt, 
2	no more than she had ever done; and much as she had always 
2	she could derive from the friendship 
2	the apothecary, who arrived about the 
2	have walked three miles so early in the day, in such dirty weather, and by 
2	capital," added her sister, and they both 
2	him, for she will not know him herself." "Then, my dear, you 
2	hope is a rather extraordinary one after my declaration. 
2	sister is recovered, you shall, if you please, name the very day of 
2	wedding clothes, she should undoubtedly see her 
2	at the assembly had not been calculated 
2	my share in the conversation if you are speaking of music. There 
2	are not puffed about with every attempt to move them. My temper would perhaps be 
2	that I come prepared to admire them. At present 
2	dependent concerns, had not yet lost their 
2	an anecdote with humour, and laugh at their 
2	high woody hills; and in front, a stream of some natural importance was swelled 
2	uncle and aunt stopped also, and while the former was 
2	choosing to walk up and down the room together, with either of which 
2	afterwards. The prospect of such delights was very cheering, and they parted in mutual good 
2	for the first appearance of Pemberley Woods 
3	improprieties match. lamentations finds conditional attended cases this." 	11
3	best." overcome; deal. Darcy!" happened. fitted uncompanionable least." 	7
3	self-denial, cheeks 	5
3	moderation 	6
3	satisfactory thing." night; eyes_. proud; 	13
3	openly. you? improves proclaim commissioning chose horseback, 	2
3	artful sir; 	19
3	deserts proposed turn, comparative 	6
3	hands 	2
3	extravagance, related, vacant; 	10
3	qualification." hurry approbation 	8
3	Catherine,' other, extorted downstairs, detailed; 	22
3	carriages, Words colour. 	25
3	carriage." adhered Louisa brought "Believe prodigious merely 	23
3	_his_. 	16
3	accounting keep returned, impatiently. conjecture Intimate vexation. method 	17
3	addresses. belonged. dwell minds _us_ justified attacked 	3
3	handsome! 	24
3	laugh." heart; Darcy." knows proposal, _being desired mother 	1
3	interview 	14
3	song. injuring contents default conclude?" is, audible 	10
3	part," do. amazed somehow 	25
3	consequently insipidity, plain." married. brother's herself--"that default 	11
3	So fashion, Anxiety news--capital months." 	23
3	February 	23
3	think. conveyed 	12
3	demean why, reel?" 	22
3	word rather, placed. October. may, requesting 	23
3	feared, hatefully spots discovery! 	7
3	readily--easily--to monosyllable. crying found. Jane; mingling 	8
3	various dresses. plan aspect. uncivil? usual. hesitate. to-morrow; 	9
3	trees. "Then," bringing younger class." "Engaged plans 	25
3	engross uncertain 	14
3	come. abilities Pemberley persuasion. them?" Brighton gown 	5
3	envied intolerable, warded complaisance, description, half-hour succeeded 	24
3	harshly, across meanwhile Yet, mother. man's unappeasable. lodges 	10
3	_sentiment_ indifferent case--was proudest, Elizabeth o'clock, 	3
3	card-table--but overcoming Darcy's _what_ ma'am?--is bustle company. 	9
3	entreated Meryton." mortifying, return, forcing heirs 	25
3	forgotten. triumph. guided "Two dishonesty felicity Brighton, 	9
3	vexation, 	23
3	altogether--Mr. indecorum arranged, appear; 	12
3	property Far express 	22
3	Meryton? kind failed doubt 	18
3	dear," 	23
3	earliest accomplished." assents say "has done--I ease 	5
3	valuable misery occupied contain Derbyshire." nicely 	6
3	rocks hills; 	3
3	was; Absence year; 	17
3	"Pray, 	5
3	stumbling attempt severe jealous glancing interrupted 	20
3	thankful; spirits. foreseen. Four softened; suppressed, Is 	4
3	single?" eagerness; Oh anecdote below, hasty _he_ overheard 	23
3	thither--for "Dining could. Lydia," designedly recovering favour, 	23
3	larder diversion. preservative activity no; 	2
3	restraint, 	12
3	freely. him--just country," advising shops anyone. strictures consolatory 	20
3	questions; accept noisy outrun nephew know. supposed, "_wished_ 	19
3	regain word; trouble? haughty, delighted assurance. manner, 	15
3	lamentations confessed black 	23
3	care exerted LIZZY,-- thoughts? did 	20
3	mislead smiling. ill-usage, height "Thank Jane--his complacency. 	19
3	nobody does. objections; discrimination; 	12
3	philosopher sweetest-tempered, meanest world; cases, was; 	16
3	price compliments apologised unbending 	21
3	style?--for tenor believing 	1
3	studier represented, ceaseless 	24
3	reply. 	18
3	undoubtedly conscientious 	20
3	four-and-twenty 	18
3	remarkably However, bare done--I 	2
3	contrariety ridicule." endeavoured off. mischievously Mr. teased _make_ 	6
3	divided Darcy, hundred bestow!--how 	14
3	listen. expression boys acknowledge doubtful, farther, minute 	11
3	possibility therefore smilingly. probabilities, censure," patron. 	7
3	names _should_ everybody! unjust. exchanged, kitchen. Lambton, professed 	19
3	expectations suspended, observation, hours; himself." acquainted! unworthily. Oh! 	2
3	nine 	3
3	complete. husbands, dinner." successfully governess! inferiority--of bewitched 	21
3	sort 	2
3	perturbed I, eyes. glow could 	2
3	evenings dare dress, carefully charming applied, spots 	6
3	"Then," "Now speech, Rosings face, triumph, fortnight branch 	8
3	employment highest invaluable; am! 	20
3	forgave, containing mind! house--but bow, 	14
3	turn family 	7
3	"Hunsford," spoke mature remove offensive slight, 	2
3	readily, mislead 	9
3	inquired sneer. (by _not_. good-naturedly disappointment! 	11
3	alienated prodigious ma'am?" "Yes, indistinctly Derbyshire." 	7
3	scampering King, Anne _me_--I husband, steadiness eating sly 	19
3	dissuade ours charms salutation on, master," 	11
3	there?" complete, diffident court." empty-headed approbation. 	20
3	interest 	8
3	entailed, sell "Bingley." express anxious interest before, 	1
3	haughty, "No; most listener 	13
3	regret, sharers 	22
3	expressed, commended, equivocal, patience, chimney-piece mentioned; 	7
3	grand sight. _are_ 	16
3	indifference 	6
