365 Foreign DishesbyUnknown

with sugar, cinnamon and grated lemon peel, and cover each apple with
a rich pie-paste. Lay on a well-buttered pie-dish and let bake until
done. Serve with wine sauce.


31.--Swiss Potato Dumpling.

Boil 6 potatoes, then grate them. Mix with 2 tablespoonfuls of flour
and 2 tablespoonfuls of butter and 3 eggs. Make into a soft dough;
roll out and then spread with fried bread-crumbs. Make into round
dumplings and let boil twenty minutes. Serve hot with melted butter
poured over.




_AUGUST._


1.--German Pot Roast.

Take a 5-pound beef roast. Rub with salt and black pepper and paprica;
pour over some boiling vinegar; add 2 bay-leaves, a few peppercorns
and cloves. Let stand over night. Heat 2 tablespoonfuls of dripping in
a saucepan; lay in the meat with 2 sliced onions. Let stew slowly with
one cup of water and 1/2 cup of the spiced vinegar until tender.
Thicken the sauce with flour and serve hot with potato pancakes.


2.--Scotch Soup.

Cut a sheep's liver into pieces and stew with the sheep's head in 4
quarts of water. Add sliced onions, sliced leeks, carrots, turnips,
parsley and thyme, salt, pepper and a few cloves. Let all cook until
tender; then strain. Let stand until cool. Skim off the fat; heat and
mix with flour until brown; let boil. Add a glass of white wine. Cook
all together and serve hot.


3.--Spanish Fried Potatoes.

Peel some new potatoes and cook until tender. Mix some fine
bread-crumbs with grated Parmesan cheese and chopped parsley. Beat 2
eggs with salt and pepper; dip each potato in beaten egg and roll in
the bread-crumbs. Fry in deep hot lard until brown. Serve hot.


4.--French Frozen Milk Punch.

Sweeten 1 quart of milk with 2 cupfuls of sugar; let come to a boil.
Remove from the fire and grate in 1/2 nutmeg. When cool, freeze until
half frozen; then stir in 3 cupfuls of whipped cream and freeze again.
Add 1/2 cup of rum and 1 cupful of French brandy. Let freeze until
hard and serve.


5.--Bavarian Fruit Compote.

Cook 2 cups of water with 1 cup of wine. Add 1 cup of sugar and a
pinch of cinnamon and some strawberries, cherries and blackberries.
Let simmer in the juice until fruit is done. Put in a glass dish and
pour over the syrup. Serve cold.


6.--Vienna Rice Custard.

Boil 1/2 cup of rice in 1 quart of milk; add salt to taste; boil until
very soft. Beat the yolks of 3 eggs with 4 tablespoonfuls of sugar and
stir in the rice. Flavor with rose-water and put in a well-buttered
pudding-dish. Beat the whites with pulverized sugar to a stiff froth;
spread on the custard and let bake in the oven until done. Serve cold.


7.--French Fried Cucumbers.

Peel the cucumbers and cut into inch slices. Sprinkle with salt and
pepper and dip in beaten eggs and fine bread-crumbs. Season with salt
and pepper and fry in hot lard until brown. Serve with tomato-sauce
and veal chops.


8.--German Cherry Soup.

Boil 1 quart of cherries until soft; sweeten to taste. Add some grated
lemon peel, some cinnamon, 1 bottle of red wine and 2 bottles of
water. Serve ice-cold with macaroons.


9.--Swiss Pancakes.

Peel and grate 4 raw potatoes; mix with 1 ounce of butter, 1 ounce of
bread-crumbs, 1/4 pint of milk, 1 large tablespoonful of Swiss cheese,
the yolks of three eggs and the whites beaten stiff. Season with salt
and pepper and mix with 1 tablespoonful of flour to a smooth batter;
then fry in hot lard until brown. Serve hot.


10.--English Tarts.

Make a rich puff paste; roll out thin and cut into squares; then fill
with fruit jam; turn over and pinch in the edges. Drop in a kettle of
deep hot lard and fry until a delicate brown. Sprinkle with pulverized
sugar and serve hot.


11.--Norwegian Rice.

Cook rice until tender; then reheat in a well-seasoned chicken stock.
Put on a platter; sprinkle with chopped chicken liver, scrambled eggs
and grated cheese and serve at once.


12.--Spanish Broiled Kidney.

Take a fresh kidney; clean and cut into thin slices; run a skewer
through them to hold them together. Sprinkle with salt and pepper and
brush with butter; put on a broiler and cook for five minutes. Then
place on a platter; pour over some lemon-juice and hot butter;
sprinkle with parsley and serve at once.


13.--Egyptian Stuffed Peppers.

Cut off the tops and remove the seeds from large sweet peppers. Stuff
with chopped raw beef highly seasoned, and mix with chopped onion,
parsley, tomato, a beaten egg and 2 tablespoonfuls of chutney. Put the
stuffed peppers in a baking-pan with a little hot water; sprinkle with
bits of butter and let bake three-quarters of an hour. Serve. Garnish
with cucumber salad.


14.--English Tea Cakes.

Beat 1/4 pound of butter with 1/4 pound of sugar to a cream. Add 1 egg
and 1 teaspoonful each of cinnamon and mace. Mix with 6 ounces of
sifted flour, a pinch of salt and milk enough to make a stiff dough;
then roll out very thin. Cut into round cakes and bake in a quick oven
until done.


15.--Bavarian Cheese Cake.

Make a rich biscuit dough; roll out and place on a well-buttered
pie-dish. Then mix 1/2 pound of cottage cheese with a pinch of salt,
1/4 cup of melted butter, 1/2 cup of sugar, 1/2 lemon grated, 2 yolks
of eggs and 1/2 cup of currants; add the whites beaten stiff. Fill the
pie with the cheese. Serve hot or cold with coffee.


16.--Spanish Chicken.

Cut a spring chicken into pieces at the joints; season with salt and
pepper and fry until brown. Remove the chicken; add 1 onion, 2 cloves
of garlic chopped and 1 cup of tomato-sauce. Cover and let simmer;
then add the chicken with 1 glass of sherry wine. Cook ten minutes.
Serve hot with boiled rice.


17.--Polish Shrimp Salad.

Drain 1 cup of shrimps and 1 can of sardines; cut into small pieces.
Add 2 hard-boiled eggs, 1 small onion, a few capers and gherkins
chopped fine and chopped parsley. Mix with 1/4 cup of vinegar. Line
the salad bowl with the crisp lettuce leaves. Add the salad and pour
over a mayonnaise dressing and serve.


18.--Dutch Apple Pudding.

Peel and chop apples; mix with 1/2 cup of nuts, raisins, the juice and
rind of 1/2 lemon and 1 tablespoonful of brandy. Then add the yolks of
4 eggs and the whites beaten to a stiff froth. Let bake in a moderate
oven until done. Serve cold.


19.--Bavarian Potatoes.

Peel and cook some new potatoes with 1 sliced onion, salt and pepper,
until tender. Then brown 1 tablespoonful of flour in 2 teaspoonfuls of
butter; add 1/2 cup of water; let boil well with some chopped parsley,
salt and pepper; then add the potatoes and let simmer five minutes.
Serve hot.


20.--Spanish Steak Roll.

Cut thin slices from the round steak; then chop 1 onion, 2 tomatoes,
some celery, parsley and 2 hard-boiled eggs and season with salt and
pepper. Mix with butter and fine bread-crumbs; then spread the mixture
on the steak, and roll up. Sprinkle with flour; lay closely in a pan
of hot dripping; cover and let simmer until tender. Serve hot,
garnished with olives and parsley.


21.--Oriental Cabbage.

Chop a small head of cabbage, then fry 1 onion and 2 sour apples
sliced thin. Add the chopped cabbage, 1/2 cup of stock and the juice
of 1/2 lemon; sprinkle with salt and cayenne pepper; add 1/2
teaspoonful of curry-powder. Cover and let all simmer until tender.
Serve very hot on a border of boiled rice.


22.--Dutch Salad.

Soak 3 Dutch herrings in milk; then cut off the heads and tails and
cut herrings into one-half inch pieces. Add 2 apples cut fine, 2
hard-boiled eggs sliced thin, some cooked beets cut fine, some celery
and green onions cut into very small pieces. Season and mix together.
Pour over some vinaigrette sauce, and sprinkle with chopped gherkins.


23.--Greek Cucumbers.

Peel large cucumbers; cut off the ends; scoop out the seeds; sprinkle
with salt. Then mix boiled rice with some chopped green onions and
stuff the cucumbers. Lay the cucumbers in a stew-pan; pour over 1 cup
of stock and the juice of a lemon; add 1 tablespoonful of butter, and
let cook until tender. Serve hot, and pour over a well-seasoned white
sauce. Garnish with parsley.


24.--Russian Beef Roll.

Chop 2 pounds of beef with 1/4 pound of suet; add 4 small onions, 2
cloves of garlic and 3 sprigs of parsley chopped fine. Season with
salt, pepper and nutmeg. Mix with some bread-crumbs and a beaten egg.
Shape into a roll and lay in a baking-dish; moisten with broth and let
bake until done. Serve on a platter with a border of mashed potatoes
and garnish with fried parsley.


25.--Jewish Veal Stew.

Cook 3 pounds of veal; when nearly done, add 2 cup of vinegar, 1/2 cup
of raisins, a pinch of cloves and cinnamon and a tablespoonful of
horseradish. Thicken the sauce with buttered bread-crumbs; season with
salt and pepper to taste. Serve with boiled rice.


26.--French Pop-overs.

Beat the yolks of 3 eggs until very light; add 1 pint of milk. Sift 1
pint of flour with 2 teaspoonfuls of baking powder; add 1/2
teaspoonful of salt and the whites of the eggs beaten to a stiff
froth. Flavor with rose-water. Mix well together and pour into hot
well-buttered cake-tins. Bake in a quick oven until a light brown.
Serve hot with French coffee.


27.--German Egg Toast.

Cut slices of stale bread; beat 3 eggs with a pinch of salt and 1/4
cup of milk. Dip the slices of bread in the beaten eggs and fry until
brown on both sides. Cover with pulverized sugar; sprinkle with
cinnamon and some finely chopped nuts. Serve hot.


28.--Irish Potato Puffs.

Peel and boil potatoes well seasoned; then mash thoroughly with a lump
of butter. Add some milk and 2 eggs; beat well until very light. Then
fry in deep hot lard by the tablespoonful until a light brown. Serve
hot with broiled steak.


29.--Belgian Eggs.

Take 4 eggs, 2 cups of milk, 4 tablespoonfuls of sugar, 1 teaspoonful
of flour. Beat whites separate; add flour to the yolks and sugar; beat
until stiff. Beat the whites and scald in milk; strain from the milk,
and set aside. Take the yolk, and stir gently in the milk until thick.
Remove from the fire. Place in a dish to cool. Flavor with vanilla and
then put the whites on top and serve.


30.--Irish Cucumber Salad.

Peel the cucumbers and slice thin; add 1 onion sliced. Sprinkle well
with salt; let stand half an hour on ice; press out all the water;
sprinkle with white pepper and chopped parsley. Add vinegar mixed with
sugar, to taste, and salad oil. Serve at once.


31.--German Iced Beer Soup.

Take one quart of fresh beer. Sweeten to taste and flavor with a pinch
of cinnamon and nutmeg. Slice a lemon very thin and put in the beer.
Let get very cold on ice and serve with sponge-cake.




_SEPTEMBER._


1.--Dutch Biscuits.

Make a soft biscuit dough; then put on a well-floured baking-board and
roll out one-half inch thick. Sprinkle with sugar, cinnamon and grated
lemon peel and pour over some melted butter. Then roll up the dough
and cut into inch thick slices; lay in a well-buttered baking-pan and
let bake in a hot oven until done.


2.--Hindoo Oyster Fritters.

Boil large oysters in their liquor; season with salt, pepper and
curry-powder. Let come to a boil; then drain, and spread the oysters
with highly seasoned minced chicken. Dip them in a seasoned egg batter
and fry in deep hot lard to a golden brown. Serve hot, garnished with
fried parsley and lemon slices.


3.--Jewish Chrimsel.

Soak 1/2 loaf of bread in milk; add 1 cup of sugar, 1/2 cup of
raisins, 1/2 cup of pounded nuts, the grated peel of a lemon and a
pinch of cinnamon. Then mix with the yolks of 4 eggs and the whites
beaten stiff and fry by the tablespoonful in hot fat until brown.
Serve hot with wine sauce.


4.--Spanish Relish.

Stone some large olives and fill the space with anchovy paste, mixed
with well-seasoned tomato-sauce. Then fry thin slices of bread and
spread with some of the paste. Place a filled olive in the centre;
sprinkle with chopped hard-boiled eggs and garnish with fillets of
anchovies and sprigs of parsley.


5.--French Orange Compote.

Make a syrup of sugar and water; add a little lemon-juice. Peel and
remove seeds of oranges; cut into quarters and lay them in the boiling
syrup; let cook ten minutes. Remove the oranges to a glass dish; pour
over the syrup and garnish with candied cherries.


6.--Spanish Baked Chicken.

Clean and season a chicken with salt and pepper and let boil until
tender. Put the chicken in a baking-dish; pour over some tomato-sauce
highly seasoned; sprinkle with well-buttered bread-crumbs and let bake
until brown. Place on a large platter with a border of boiled rice and
pour over the sauce. Serve hot.


7.--Swiss Beet Salad.

Boil red beets until tender; skin and cut into thin slices. Sprinkle
with salt, whole pepper, whole cloves, 2 bay-leaves and mix with wine
vinegar. Let stand. Serve the next day.


8.--Bombay Chicken Croquettes.

Boil a fat hen well seasoned with salt, pepper, 1 sliced onion, 2
green peppers and 2 cloves of garlic. Remove the chicken and chop fine
and mix with chopped parsley, the grated rind of 1/2 lemon, 1/2
teaspoonful of paprica and a pinch of nutmeg. Add a little chopped
tarragon and chervil and 2 beaten eggs. Mix with the sauce and form
into croquettes. Then dip into beaten eggs and fine bread-crumbs, and
fry in deep hot lard a golden brown. Serve hot. Garnish with fried
parsley and serve tomato-sauce in a separate dish, flavored with
chopped mango chutney.


9.--Swiss Veal Pie.

Cut cooked veal into small pieces; season and moisten with a rich beef
gravy. Pour into a deep pie-dish. Then make a cover with mashed
potatoes moistened with cream; sprinkle with bits of butter and let
bake until brown. Serve hot.


10.--Spanish Rice.

Fry 1 large chopped onion with 2 cups of tomatoes; add 1 cup of stock,
salt and pepper to taste. Cover and let simmer ten minutes; then add 2
cups of boiled rice. Mix well together with 1 tablespoonful of butter.
Let get very hot and serve.


11.--Polish Chicken Soup.

Cook a large fat chicken in 3 quarts of water; add 1 onion, 2 carrots
and 2 stalks of celery cut into small pieces and 1 cup of pearl
barley. Let all cook until tender. Remove the chicken; season the soup
to taste with salt and pepper; add some chopped parsley and serve hot
with the chicken.


12.--Norwegian Soup.

Boil a large fish in 2 quarts of water; season with salt and paprica.
Add 1 sliced onion, 2 leeks cut fine, 2 sprigs of parsley and 1
bay-leaf. Let cook well; then remove the fish. Add 1 tablespoonful of
butter and 1 quart of oysters. Let boil ten minutes. Add 1 cup of hot
cream; season to taste and serve very hot.


13.--Greek Cakes.

Mix 1/2 pound of butter and 1 cup of sugar to a cream; add 4
well-beaten eggs and the grated rind and juice of 1/2 lemon. Then stir
in 1/2 pound of flour and work into a smooth dough. Lay on a
well-floured baking-board and roll out thin. Cut into fancy shapes and
bake in a moderate oven until done. Cover with a white icing, flavored
with vanilla.


14.--Russian Sandwich.

Spread thin slices of rye bread with butter and caviare; some slices
of white bread with butter and thin slices of ham; some slices of
pumpernickel bread with butter and a layer of cottage cheese; and some
slices of brown bread with butter and cold cooked chicken sliced thin.
Put all into a press under a heavy weight for one hour; then cut into
perpendicular slices and serve.


15.--Spanish Dessert.

Dissolve 1/2 box of gelatin. Then cook 1 pint of milk; add 6
tablespoonfuls of sugar and stir in the yolks of 3 eggs. Mix all
together with the gelatin and the whites of eggs beaten to a stiff
froth; add 1 teaspoonful of vanilla. Pour into a mold and place on
ice. Serve with whipped cream.


16.--German Bread Tarte.

Take 1 cup of rye bread-crumbs and mix with the beaten yolks of 4
eggs, 1/2 cup of sugar, some pounded almonds, a pinch of cinnamon,
nutmeg and a piece of chocolate grated. Add 1 teaspoonful of
lemon-juice, 1 tablespoonful of brandy and 1 of wine. Beat the whites
to a stiff froth; add to the mixture. Put in a well-buttered
pudding-dish and bake until brown. Serve with wine sauce.


17.--Russian Stewed Fish.

Cut a white fish into pieces and salt well; let stand. Then cut 1
onion and 1 clove of garlic in thin slices; fry in 1 tablespoonful of
butter. Stir in 1 tablespoonful of flour until brown. Then fill the
pan with water and let boil. Add 1 teaspoonful of celery seed, 1
bay-leaf, a few cloves, a pinch of thyme and mace, 1/2 teaspoonful of
paprica and salt to taste. Let boil. Add the fish to the sauce;
sprinkle with black pepper and ginger and let cook until done. Remove
the fish to a platter. Beat the yolks of 2 eggs with a little water
and stir in the sauce with some chopped parsley. Let get very hot and
pour over the fish. Garnish with lemon slices and sprigs of parsley.


18.--German Liver Dumplings.

Chop 1/2 pound of liver; add 1 chopped onion, some parsley, salt,
pepper and a little nutmeg. Mix with 2 beaten eggs and 1 tablespoonful
of butter. Add enough bread-crumbs to form into small balls and boil
in soup-stock and serve with the soup.


19.--Jewish Sour Fish.

Season a trout and let cook with 1 sliced onion, 1 sliced lemon, 2
tablespoonfuls of vinegar, a few cloves and a pinch of pepper. Add
cinnamon, 1/4 cup of raisins and 1 tablespoonful of butter. When done,
remove to a platter. Add some brown sugar, lemon-juice and chopped
parsley to the sauce; let boil and pour over the fish. Serve cold.
Garnish with parsley.


20.--Compote de Bannanes.

Peel 1 dozen bananas and cut them in halves. Then cook 1/2 cup of
water with 1/2 pound of sugar; let boil ten minutes; then add the
juice of a lemon; let cook. Add the sliced bananas to the hot syrup
and stew slowly until done. Remove the bananas to a dish and pour over
the syrup. Serve very cold for dessert.


21.--English Peach Pie.

Make a rich pie-crust and let bake until done. Peel and chop some
peaches and mix with sugar to taste. Fill the pie with the peaches;
let bake. Whip 1 cup of rich cream with pulverized sugar and flavor
with vanilla. Spread the cream high over the pie; let get cold
and serve.


22.--Bean Polenta (ITALIAN).

Cook 2 cups of white dried beans with salt and pepper until very soft;
press through a colander. Fry 1 onion in 2 tablespoonfuls of butter
until brown; mix with the beans. Add 1 tablespoonful of vinegar, 1
teaspoonful of made mustard, some lemon-juice and 2 tablespoonfuls of
molasses. Let all get very hot and serve with pork roast.


23.--French Almond Pudding.

Take 1/2 pound of almonds and pound in a mortar. Mix with 6 yolks of
eggs and a cup of sugar, 1 tablespoonful of lemon-juice, 1
tablespoonful of brandy, 3 slices of stale cake-crumbs and the whites
of the eggs beaten stiff. Put in a well-buttered pudding-dish and bake
in a slow oven until done.


24.--Italian Cutlets.

Take tender veal cutlets; season highly with pepper and salt. Dip in
beaten egg and fine bread-crumbs and fry in boiling lard until a light
brown. Have ready some boiled macaroni well seasoned. Put on a platter
with the cutlets and pour over all a highly seasoned tomato-sauce.


25.--Jewish Gefuellte Fish.

Take 2 pounds of trout and 2 pounds of red fish; cut in two-inch
slices. Remove the skin from one side of the slices. Chop 2 onions;
add salt, pepper and mix with fine cracker-crumbs and 1 egg to a
paste. Lay the paste on the fish and put back the skin. Boil the fish
with salt, pepper and sliced onion, 1 carrot and 2 sprigs of parsley
cut fine, a pinch of cloves and allspice. Let boil two hours. Add a
tablespoonful of rich cream. Serve cold.


26.--Swedish Stewed Veal.

Season 3 pounds of veal. Lay some sliced bacon in a saucepan; let get
hot; add the veal. Cover and let brown with 2 sliced onions, 2 carrots
and an herb bouquet, 1 bay-leaf and 1 tablespoonful of butter. Add 1
pint of water and let simmer until tender. Add chopped mushrooms and a
small glass of wine. Let all get hot and serve.


27.--French Apple Pie.

Line a deep pie-dish with a rich pie-crust. Chop 4 apples very fine
and mix with sugar, cinnamon, lemon-juice and 1/2 cup of currants.
Then mix with the yolks of 2 eggs well beaten. Fill the pie and bake
until done. Beat the whites with pulverized sugar and spread on the
pie. Let get light brown on top.


28.--Vienna Filled Apples.

Remove the core and scrape out the inside of the apples. Mix the
scraped apple with chopped raisins, nuts, cinnamon, sugar and grated
lemon peel. Fill the apples; place in a stew-pan. Mix 1/2 cup of wine
with 1/2 cup of water. Sweeten with 3 tablespoonfuls of sugar and pour
over the apples. Let cook slowly until the apples are tender. Remove
from the fire; put on a glass dish. Pour over the sauce and
serve cold.


29.--Scotch Stewed Tripe.

Clean and boil tripe until tender; then fry 1 chopped carrot and 1
onion until light brown. Stir in 1 tablespoonful of flour; add 1 cup
of stock, 1 bay-leaf, some thyme and parsley; let boil. Season with
salt, pepper and lemon-juice. Cut the tripe into narrow strips; add to
the sauce. Let simmer one-half hour and serve.


30.--Polish Stewed Calves' Feet.

Boil the calves' feet in salted water until tender; then take out the
bones. Fry 1 chopped onion in butter; stir in 1 tablespoonful of
flour; add 1 cup of stock. Let boil with 1 bay-leaf, some parsley
chopped fine and 1/4 cup of vinegar, salt and pepper to taste. Then
add the feet and let simmer ten minutes. Stir in the yolks of an egg
and serve hot.




_OCTOBER._


1.--Oriental Pudding.

Heat 1 large cup of milk and stir in 3 tablespoonfuls of butter; let
boil up. Then stir in 1 small cup of flour sifted with 1 teaspoonful
of baking-powder and a pinch of salt; stir until a smooth batter. Then
remove from the fire and stir in 4 well-beaten eggs, 1/2 cup of
preserved ginger minced fine and 2 tablespoonfuls of the syrup; mix
thoroughly. Put into a well-buttered mold and let steam two hours.
Serve hot with wine sauce.


2.--Swedish Batter Cakes.

Sift 1 pint of flour. Add a salt-spoonful of salt, 1 teaspoonful of
soda dissolved in a little milk, the yolks of 6 eggs and the whites
beaten to a stiff froth and enough milk to make a thin batter. Then
bake on a hot greased griddle until done. Serve hot.


3.--Chinese Chop Suey.

Cut 2 pounds of fresh pork into thin strips and let fry ten minutes.
Add 1 large onion sliced thin and let fry; then add 1 cup of sliced
mushrooms, 2 stalks of celery cut fine, 1/4 cup of Chinese sauce and a
pinch of pepper; moisten with 1/2 cup of hot water. Cover and let
simmer until tender. Thicken the sauce with flour moistened with a
little milk and let boil. Put some well-seasoned cooked rice on a
platter, pour over the chop suey and serve very hot.


4.--Russian National Soup.

Chop and fry all kinds of vegetables until tender. Make a
highly-seasoned beef broth; add the fried vegetables, 2 boiled beets
chopped fine, some chopped ham, 1/4 teaspoonful of fennel seed, 2
sprigs of parsley chopped. Let boil well; then add 1 cup of hot cream
and serve at once.


5.--English Buns.

Set a sponge over night with 1 cake of compressed yeast dissolved in a
cup of warm water, 3 cups of milk and flour enough to make a thick
batter. Then add 1/2 cup of melted butter, 1 cup of sugar, a
salt-spoonful of salt, 1/2 teaspoonful of soda, 1/2 nutmeg grated and
flour enough to make a stiff dough. Let raise five hours; then roll
out half an inch thick and cut into round cakes. Lay in a
well-buttered baking-pan. Let stand half an hour; then bake until a
light brown. Brush the top with white of egg beaten with
pulverized sugar.


6.--Japanese Fish.

Clean and season a large white fish with salt and paprica and let boil
with 4 sliced shallots and 1 clove of garlic mashed fine. When nearly
done, add 1 tablespoonful of butter, 2 sprigs of parsley chopped fine,
1 tablespoonful of soy, 1 tablespoonful each of tarragon and
Worcestershire sauce. Let cook until done. Place on a platter. Garnish
with fried parsley and serve with boiled rice.


7.--Swiss Creamed Potatoes.

Boil potatoes until tender and slice them thin. Heat two ounces of
butter; add a dessert-spoonful of flour. Then stir in some rich milk
until it thickens; add the potatoes, salt, pepper and chopped parsley.
Let boil up; add a little hot cream and serve at once.


8.--Belgian Chicken.

Cut a cooked chicken into pieces; add some slices of cold veal. Heat 1
cup of stock; add 1/4 teaspoonful of mustard, 1/2 teaspoonful of
paprica, a pinch of white pepper and salt to taste. Add the chicken
and 1 glass of sherry wine. Let all cook ten minutes. Add 3
tablespoonfuls of currant jelly. Serve hot with toasted croutons.


9.--Swiss Biscuits.

Beat the yolks of 2 eggs with 1/4 pound of butter; add a pinch of salt
and pepper, a teaspoonful of mustard and 5 ounces of grated Swiss
cheese. Mix well with 1/4 pound of flour or enough to make a stiff
dough; roll out and cut into round biscuits. Bake in a moderate oven
for twenty minutes, and serve.


10.--French Fritters.

Boil 1 quart of water; add 1 teaspoonful of salt, 2 tablespoonfuls of
butter; then stir in enough sifted flour until thick and smooth. When
cold, stir in 5 beaten eggs, sugar and a little nutmeg to taste. Fry
in deep hot lard to a golden brown. Serve with wine sauce.


11.--German Waffles.

Mix 1/4 pound of butter with 6 tablespoonfuls of sugar. Add the yolks
of 5 eggs, 1/2 cup of milk, 1/2 pound of sifted flour with 2
teaspoonfuls of baking-powder, a pinch of salt and the grated peel of
a lemon. Mix well; add the whites beaten stiff and bake in a well
greased waffle iron. Sprinkle with pulverized sugar and serve hot.


12.--Dutch Rice Fritters.

Take 1 cup of boiled rice and mix with 3 beaten eggs. Then sift 1/2
cup of flour with 1 teaspoonful of baking-powder and a pinch of salt.
Add some sugar to taste. Beat to a light thick batter and fry a
spoonful at a time in boiling lard. Sprinkle with pulverized sugar and
serve hot with cooked fruit.


13.--French Lettuce Salad.

Take the inner lettuce leaves; sprinkle with salt and pepper. Mix the
yolks of 2 hard-boiled eggs with 1 tablespoonful of olive-oil and stir
all together with 2 tablespoonfuls of white wine vinegar. Serve at
once with meats.


14.--Austrian Baked Eggs.

Poach fresh eggs one at a time; then put in a well-buttered
baking-dish; sprinkle with salt, pepper, bits of butter and grated
cheese. Pour over the top 1/2 cup of cream sauce and cover with fine
bread-crumbs. Set in the oven to brown and serve hot with
tomato-sauce.


15.--Swedish Stewed Chicken.

Cut a spring chicken in pieces at the joints; season with salt and
pepper and saute in hot butter. Add 2 cups of cream sauce, 1/2 cup of
boiled rice, some chopped parsley and bits of butter. Let stew slowly
until the chicken is very tender. Serve hot.


16.--Polish Filled Fish.

Clean the fish; cut open along the backbone. Remove all the fish from
the skin and bone from head to tail and chop fine. Fry 1 onion in
butter; add some soaked bread. Take from the fire and mix with the
chopped fish. Add 2 eggs and chopped parsley; season highly with salt
and pepper, a pinch of cloves and nutmeg. Fill the skin of the fish
with the mixture and boil with sliced onions, a few lemon slices, some
parsley and a tablespoonful of butter, salt and pepper, until done.
Serve hot or cold.


17.--Eels a la Poulette.

Clean and skin the eels; let boil with salt, pepper and vinegar. Then
cut into three-inch pieces. Heat 2 tablespoonfuls of butter; add 1
onion chopped; stir in 1 tablespoonful of flour until brown; add 1 cup
of water, salt, pepper, 1 bay-leaf, some parsley and thyme. Let boil
well; add the eels and 1 glass of wine. Boil ten minutes longer;
thicken the sauce with the yolks of 2 eggs well beaten and seasoned
with lemon-juice. Serve with fried croutons.


18.--Italian Baked Fish.

Clean and season a blue fish with salt, pepper and cloves. Lay the
fish in a baking-pan with 1 onion chopped fine and 2 tablespoonfuls of
chopped carrot and parsley. Pour over 1 glass of wine; sprinkle with
flour. Put flakes of butter over the fish and let bake until brown.
Serve with macaroni.


19.--Dutch Stuffed Goose.

Clean and season a goose and stuff with oysters well seasoned with
salt, pepper, parsley, thyme and bits of butter rolled in fine
bread-crumbs. Put in a baking-dish. Pour over the oyster liquor and a
little hot water; let bake until done. Baste as often as necessary.
Serve with red currant jelly.


20.--Swiss Roast Turkey.

Clean and season the turkey with salt and pepper. Then fill with 2
cups of bread-crumbs mixed with a lump of butter, some chopped onion
and thyme, salt and pepper to taste, 1/2 cup of seeded raisins and 1/2
cup of nuts. Mix all well with 2 beaten eggs. Put turkey in
dripping-pan and let bake a rich brown. Baste often with the dripping
until tender. Serve with dressing.


21.--French Turkey Soup.

Cut off all the meat from left-over turkey bones. Put the bones in
cold water and boil with 1 small onion, 1 carrot, 2 pieces of celery
and 2 sprigs of parsley, all cut fine. Add 1 cup of tomato-sauce. Let
all cook well, seasoned with salt and pepper. Remove the bones; add
boiled rice and the turkey meat cut into dice pieces. Let boil and
serve hot with fried croutons.


22.--Swedish Baked Fish.

Clean and season a trout with salt, black pepper and cayenne. Lay in a
baking-pan; dredge with flour; sprinkle with parsley and bits of
butter; add a little water and vinegar. Let bake in a hot oven. Baste
often with butter until done. Garnish with parsley and serve hot with
cream sauce.


23.--Jewish Stewed Sweetbreads.

Clean and parboil the sweetbreads; then fry 1 small sliced onion in
hot fat until light brown. Stir in 1 tablespoonful of flour; add 1/2
cup of water and 1/2 cup of wine vinegar; let boil up. Add 1 bay-leaf,
a few cloves, 1/4 cup of seeded raisins, a few thin slices of lemon
and chopped parsley. Season with salt and paprica to taste; add 1
tablespoonful of brown sugar. Let boil; add the sweetbreads and simmer
until done. Serve cold.


24.--German Stuffed Turkey.

Singe and clean a fat turkey. Season well with salt and pepper. Chop
the giblets; add some chopped veal and pork, 1 onion, 2 cloves of
garlic and parsley chopped, salt and pepper. Mix with 2 eggs and stuff
the turkey. Put in the dripping-pan with some hot water. Dredge with
flour; let bake until done. Baste often with the sauce. Serve the
turkey with the dressing. Garnish with boiled beets sliced thin.


25.--Neapolitan Salad.

Cut cold chicken or turkey in small dice pieces; add some cold
potatoes, beets and celery, cut fine; sprinkle with chopped
hard-boiled eggs, salt and pepper. Line the salad bowl with lettuce
leaves; add the salad. Cover with a French mayonnaise dressing.
Garnish with capers and beets.


26.--Bavarian Stuffed Chicken.

Clean and season a fat hen. Chop the giblets; add some truffles, a
chopped onion, parsley, bread-crumbs, a beaten egg, salt, black pepper
and paprica to taste. Then fill the chicken; heat some dripping in a
large saucepan; lay in the chicken, cover, and cook slowly with 1 cup
of hot water until tender.


27.--Hungarian Baked Herring.

Bone the herring and cut into small pieces. Slice some cooked
potatoes; then butter a baking-dish; sprinkle with flour. Put a layer
of potatoes, some chopped onion and herring and bits of butter until
dish is full; sprinkle with pepper. Make the top layer of potatoes and
bits of butter. Moisten with 3 tablespoonfuls of sour cream. Bake in a
moderate oven until brown. Serve hot.


28.--French Stewed Quail.

Stuff the quail. Put 1 tablespoonful of butter in a large stew-pan;
add some thin slices of bacon. Let get very hot. Lay in the birds;
sprinkle with salt and pepper; add 1 small onion and 1 carrot chopped
fine. Cover and let brown a few minutes, then add 1 cup of hot water.
Let stew slowly until tender. Thicken the sauce with flour mixed with
milk; add some chopped parsley; let boil up and serve hot.


29.--India Beef Curry.

Cut 2 pounds of beefsteak into inch pieces. Sprinkle with salt, pepper
and flour and fry until brown. Add 1 onion chopped fine and 1
tablespoonful of vinegar. Cover and let simmer with 1 tablespoonful of
curry-powder and 1/2 cup of hot water until meat is tender. Thicken
the sauce with flour and butter. Serve on a platter with a border of
cooked rice sprinkled with chopped parsley and garnished with fried
apple slices.


30.--Bread Pudding a la Caramel.

Mix 1 pint of soft bread-crumbs with 1/2 cup of seeded raisins, 2
tablespoonfuls of sugar and 2 eggs. Stir in 1 cup of milk and bake in
a well-buttered pudding-dish until brown. Then boil 1-1/2 cups of
brown sugar with 1/2 cup of milk and 4 tablespoonfuls of chocolate.
Stir until smooth and spread hot over the pudding.


31.--Irish Flummery.

Take 1 pint of oatmeal; pour on enough cold water to cover; let stand
over night; strain and boil with a pinch of salt until thickened. Then
add 1 cup of cooked small fruit, a lump of butter and sugar to taste.
Let get cold and serve with cream.




_NOVEMBER._


1.--Swiss Fried Sweetbreads.

Blanch the sweetbreads and sprinkle with salt and pepper; then cut
into thin slices. Dip in beaten egg and roll in grated Swiss cheese
and fine bread-crumbs and fry in a little hot butter to a golden
brown. Serve hot, garnished with parsley.


2.--Japanese Chicken.

Cut 2 spring chickens into pieces at the joints; season with salt,
ginger, pepper and curry-powder and let fry in hot olive-oil until
brown. Remove the chicken; add 1/4 cup of chopped leeks, 1/2 pint of
Japanese sauce, 1/2 cup of chrysanthemum flowers, 2 chopped red
peppers, some bamboo sprouts shaved thin and 1/2 cup of water. Cover
and let cook ten minutes. Add the chicken to the sauce with 1 cup of
cocoanut juice. Let all simmer until the chicken is tender. Serve on a
platter with a border of cooked rice and garnish with fried parsley.


3.--Hindu Venison.

Cook some venison, well seasoned, until tender and slice thin. Peel
and slice 2 apples and 1 Spanish onion; season and fry until a light
brown. Add 1 cooked carrot sliced thin, some savory herbs, and 1 cup
of mutton broth; cover and let cook fifteen minutes. Then mix 1/2
ounce of butter with 1/2 tablespoonful of curry-powder and 1
tablespoonful of lemon-juice; add to the sauce with the sliced
venison; cover and let simmer ten minutes; then add 1 tablespoonful of
currant jelly. Let get very hot and serve, garnished with fried
croutons and sliced lemon.


4.--Spanish Tongue.

Boil a beef tongue until tender; take off the outer skin. Then rub
with butter and the beaten yolk of an egg; put in a baking-dish. Add
1/2 cup of the water in which the tongue was cooked, 1/2 glass of wine
and 1/2 can of mushrooms. Sprinkle with salt and pepper and let bake
until brown. Serve garnished with the mushrooms.


5.--English Pigeon Pie.

Clean and season some young pigeons. Stuff each with chopped oysters
and bits of butter and let stew until tender with 1 onion, 2 sprigs of
parsley and 1 bay-leaf. Then line a deep pie-dish with a rich paste;
let bake and fill with the stuffed pigeons. Add the sauce; cover with
the paste and let bake until brown. Serve hot.


6.--Hungarian Stuffed Goose Neck.

Remove the skin from the neck of a fat goose and stuff with some
soaked bread, fried with 1 small chopped onion in a tablespoonful of
goose-dripping. Add chopped parsley, salt, paprica and ginger and mix
with 1 egg. Lay in a baking-pan with a little hot water and bake until
brown. Serve hot with red cabbage cooked with wine.


7.--Swedish Cabbage.

Shred a cabbage very thin; sprinkle with salt and cook in as little
water as possible until tender. Then add some milk and let boil. Add a
tablespoonful of butter mixed with flour, some mace and white pepper
to taste. Let boil up and serve hot.


8.--Spanish Fried Fish.

Season and slice red fish; roll in flour and fry until brown. Then
heat 1 tablespoonful of butter; add 1 chopped onion and 1 cup of
tomatoes; let fry; add 1 tablespoonful of flour and 1 cup of water;
also some parsley, salt, pepper and 1 bay-leaf chopped fine. Let all
cook; then add the slices of fried fish. Let all get very hot and
serve with boiled rice.


9.--German Spiced Rabbit.

Clean and cut the rabbit into pieces; sprinkle with salt, ginger,
black pepper and paprica and pour over some vinegar. Heat 1
tablespoonful of dripping; add the slices of rabbit and 1 sliced
onion, 2 bay-leaves, a few peppercorns, 2 sprigs of parsley, thyme and
a little mace. Cover with hot water and let stew slowly until tender.
Thicken the sauce with butter mixed with flour. Let cook and serve hot
with apple compote.


10.--English Layer Cake.

Bake 3 layers of sponge-cake; then mix some jelly with wine and spread
between the layers and over the top and sides. Cover with a rich
chocolate icing, flavored with vanilla.


11.--Dutch Rice Pudding.

Mix 1 cup of rice in 2 cups of milk; add 1 tablespoonful of butter,
the yolks of 4 eggs, the juice of 1/2 lemon, 1 cup of sugar and nutmeg
to taste, 1/2 cup of chopped raisins, 1/2 cup of nuts and the whites
of the eggs beaten to a stiff froth. Bake in a well-buttered
pudding-dish until done. Serve cold.


12.--Polish Poached Eggs.

Boil 1/2 cup of vinegar with one cup of water and break in fresh eggs
one at a time and poach them. Remove to a platter; sprinkle with salt
and pepper. Then add 1 tablespoonful of butter and 1 tablespoonful of
sugar to the sauce; let boil up and pour over the eggs. Serve on
buttered toast.


13.--Belgian Sweet Potato Puree.

Boil 4 sweet potatoes until soft. Mash until smooth with 1
tablespoonful of butter, 2 beaten eggs, 1 tablespoonful of brown
sugar, 1/4 teaspoonful of cinnamon and 1/4 cup of milk. Beat well. Put
in a buttered pudding-dish; pour over some melted butter; let bake
until brown. Serve hot with broiled steak.


14.--Spanish Codfish.

Parboil 1 cup of shredded codfish; heat 2 tablespoonfuls of butter;
add 1 chopped onion and 2 cups of tomatoes; let fry. Add 1
tablespoonful of flour; stir until thickened. Then add 1 cup of water,
pepper and chopped parsley; let boil well; add the codfish. Let simmer
one-half hour. Serve on buttered toast.


15.--Halibut a la Toulonaise.

Slice the fish; season highly with salt, pepper, cloves, lemon-juice
and parsley. Then roll in flour and fry in hot olive-oil until brown.
Garnish with lemon slices and parsley. Serve with a lettuce salad with
French dressing.


16.--Jewish Stewed Goose.

Clean and cut a fat goose into pieces; season with salt, pepper and
ginger. Put in a stew-pan with 1 sliced onion, 2 cloves of garlic, 1
bay-leaf, thyme and a few peppercorns; add the juice of a lemon. Cover
with hot water and let cook until tender. Thicken with flour and serve
hot with apple-sauce.


17.--Polish Rice Pudding.

Heat 1 quart of milk; add 1 cup of boiled rice, 3 ounces of seeded
raisins and 2 ounces of currants. Let cook ten minutes. Then add the
grated peel of a lemon, 1/4 of a grated nutmeg and the yolks of 6 eggs
well beaten with 1 cup of sugar. Mix thoroughly and pour into a
well-buttered pudding-dish; let bake until done. Then beat the whites
to a stiff froth with 3 tablespoonfuls of pulverized sugar; flavor
with vanilla. Spread on the pudding and let brown slightly in a hot
oven. Serve with lemon sauce.


18.--Vienna Dumplings.

Mix 2 eggs and 1/2 cup of water, a pinch of salt and enough flour to
make a stiff batter. Then drop by the tablespoonful into boiling
salted water until they rise to the surface. Remove to a platter and
fry some onions in hot butter. Sprinkle with salt and pepper and pour
over the dumplings.


19.--Bavarian Sauerkraut.

Cook 2 pounds of fresh pork; season with salt and pepper; add 2
bay-leaves and a few cloves. When half done, add 1 quart of sauerkraut
and let cook one hour. Add 1 cup of wine and 1 tablespoonful of brown
sugar. Let all cook until tender. Serve with potato dumplings.


20.--Chicken Croquettes a la Reine.

Chop cold cooked chicken with some mushrooms, parsley and thyme and
season with salt, black pepper and cayenne. Add a tablespoonful of
butter and 2 well-beaten eggs. Then form into croquettes. Dip in
beaten egg and fine bread-crumbs and fry in deep hot lard to a golden
brown. Make a cream sauce and serve with the croquettes. Garnish
with parsley.


21.--Jewish Goose Greeben.

Cut all the fat from the goose into small pieces and cook in a skillet
with 1 cup of cold water. Let cook uncovered until the water has
evaporated; then fry until brown. Sprinkle with salt and serve hot.


22.--French Venison Pie.

Cut venison in very small pieces and stew, highly seasoned, until
tender. Line a deep pie-dish with a rich pie-paste and bake. Then fill
with the venison. Add a glass of port wine, a pinch of cloves and mace
to the sauce and bits of butter rolled in flour. Pour the sauce over
the venison and cover with the paste. Rub the top with a beaten egg
and let bake until done.


23.--Belgian Broiled Quail.

Select fat quails. Rub with salt, pepper and butter and tie a very
thin strip of bacon around the body of each quail. Place on a broiler
over a slow fire; let broil twenty minutes until done. Remove the
bacon. Have ready buttered toast. Place the birds on the toast, pour
over some melted butter, chopped parsley and lemon-juice. Serve hot.


24.--Vienna Roast Beef.

Season a rib-roast of beef with salt, pepper and ginger and rub with
vinegar. Put in the dripping-pan with 1 sliced onion, 2 cloves of
garlic, 2 carrots, 2 stalks of celery cut fine, 1 bay-leaf and a few
cloves and peppercorns. Pour over 1 cup of stock and dredge with
flour. Let bake in a quick oven; allow fifteen minutes to the pound.
Serve with potato dumplings.


25.--Oysters a la Toulonaise.

Drain large oysters; sprinkle with salt and pepper. Try out a few
slices of bacon in a frying-pan; remove the bacon. Roll the oysters in
fine bread-crumbs and saute until brown on both sides. Place on hot
buttered toast; sprinkle with lemon-juice and garnish with olives.


26.--Chicken a la Bechamel.

Clean and season a fat hen. Put a few slices of chopped bacon in a
saucepan; let get hot. Add the chicken with 1 carrot, 1 onion, 2
stalks of celery chopped fine, 1 herb bouquet, 1 bay leaf, a few
cloves and allspice and 2 blades of mace, 2 sprigs of parsley and 1
cup of hot water. Let all stew until tender; then add some chopped
mushrooms and pour over all 1 cup of hot rich cream.


27.--Milanese Vegetable Soup.

Cut bacon and ham into small pieces; put in a saucepan with 1
tablespoonful of hot butter. Add all kinds of vegetables, cut into
very small pieces and let fry a few minutes. Then fill the pan with 1
quart of beef stock; let all cook slowly for half an hour; add some
boiled rice and 1 cup of tomato-sauce and cook until done. Serve hot.


28.--Swedish Salad.

Cut cold cooked fish into small pieces and mix with chopped
hard-boiled eggs, a few sliced olives, capers and gherkins. Sprinkle
with salt and pepper. Line the salad bowl with crisp lettuce leaves;
add the salad and cover with a mayonnaise dressing. Garnish with
aspic, cut into dice pieces and serve cold.


29.--Oriental Rabbit Pie.

Clean and cut a rabbit into small pieces and let stew, well seasoned
with salt and pepper and cayenne. Add 2 chopped cloves of garlic, 1
chopped green pepper, 1 Spanish onion sliced thin and 2 sliced
tomatoes, a pinch of cloves and allspice. Then line a pie-dish with a
puff paste; let bake and fill with the rabbit; add 2 chopped
hard-boiled eggs and sprinkle with curry-powder. Cover with the paste;
brush the top with a beaten egg and let bake until brown. Serve hot.


30.--Spanish Baked Fish.

Season a pike; put in a baking-pan. Pour over two ounces of melted
butter and 1 pint of sour cream; then let bake in a hot oven for
twenty minutes. Sprinkle with bread-crumbs and grated cheese and let
brown on top. Serve hot. Garnish with parsley.




_DECEMBER._


1.--English Plum Pudding.

Soak 1 pound of stale bread in hot milk; then add 1/2 pound of sugar,
1 pound of seeded raisins, and 1 pound of currants all dredged with
flour, 1/4 pound of chopped citron, 1 pound of finely chopped beef
suet, 1 nutmeg grated, 1 tablespoonful of cinnamon, cloves and mace
mixed together, a pinch of salt, 1 glass of wine and 1 glass of fine
brandy. Mix with the yolks of 8 eggs and the whites beaten to a stiff
froth. Pour the mixture into a wet cloth dredged with flour; tie well
and let boil five hours. Serve with wine sauce.


2.--Swedish Rice Pudding.

Mix 3/4 cup of rice in 1 quart of milk; add 1 cup of sugar, a pinch of
salt and 1 teaspoonful of vanilla. Pour into a pudding-dish. Put bits
of butter over the top and let bake in a moderate oven until done.
Serve cold.


3.--Portugal Soup.

Boil 2 pounds of beef and 2 pig's feet in 4 quarts of water; season
with salt and pepper. Let boil well. Add 1 head of lettuce, 1/2 head
of cabbage, a few thin slices of pumpkin, 2 carrots and 1 clove of
garlic, all cut fine, and 1 herb bouquet. Let all cook until tender;
then add 1/2 can of peas. Remove the meat; cut into thin slices;
season, and serve with the soup.


4.--Chinese Salad.

Mix 2 dozen cooked oysters with 3 truffles, and 2 cooked potatoes cut
into shreds; season with salt and pepper. Add all kinds of chopped
herbs, and moisten with white wine. Line the salad bowl with crisp
lettuce leaves; fill with the mixture; sprinkle with finely chopped
parsley. Pour over a mayonnaise dressing and garnish with
anchovy fillets.


5.--Egyptian Salad.

Mix highly seasoned cold cooked rice with some grated onion, chopped
parsley and chives; add 2 dozen fine cut French sardines. Put on crisp
lettuce leaves in a salad bowl and cover with a mayonnaise dressing
Garnish with thin shreds of red beets, and serve.


6.--English Dumplings.

Beat 3 yolks of eggs with 1 tablespoonful of sugar; add 1/2 cup of
finely chopped suet, 1/2 cup of currants, 1/2 teaspoonful of salt and
a little nutmeg. Sift 1 cup of flour with 1 heaping teaspoonful of
baking-powder; mix well with the beaten whites of the eggs. Make into
dumplings the size of an egg; let steam. Serve hot with lemon sauce.


7.--Irish Pancakes.

Mix 1/2 pound of sifted flour with 2 beaten eggs, a pinch of salt, a
pint of milk and 1/2 ounce of melted butter. Mix well to a smooth
pancake batter and fry in hot lard to a delicate brown. Sprinkle with
powdered sugar and serve hot.


8.--English Cream Pudding.

Line a well-buttered pudding-dish with a rich puff-paste and bake.
Then beat 1 cup of butter with 1/2 pound of pulverized sugar. Add the
grated rind and juice of a lemon and beat well with the yolks of 6
eggs; add the whites beaten to a froth. Fill the pudding-dish with the
mixture and bake until done.


9.--Bavarian Roast Turkey.

Clean and season a fat turkey. Stuff with 3 raw potatoes, 2 apples and
1 onion grated. Mix with a lump of butter and 1 cup of bread-crumbs;
add 1 egg. Season with sage, thyme, salt and pepper; then put in a
dripping-pan. Pour in 1 cup of water and dredge with flour. Let bake
in a hot oven until done.


10.--Jewish Stewed Cabbage.

Shred a red cabbage very fine. Heat 2 tablespoonfuls of drippings in a
pan; add the cabbage; cover and let stew with 2 apples, and 1 onion
chopped fine. Then brown 1 tablespoonful of flour in hot butter; add
1/2 cup of water mixed with vinegar. Season with salt, pepper and
sugar to taste. Pour the sauce over the cabbage; let simmer ten
minutes. Add 1/2 cup of red wine; let boil up and serve hot.


11.--Venison a la Francaise.

Season venison steaks with salt, pepper and lemon-juice. Put in a
saucepan with 2 tablespoonfuls of hot butter. Add 1 onion, 2
bay-leaves, 1 clove of garlic and a sprig of parsley minced fine. Let
brown; then add 1/2 can of mushrooms, some thyme chopped fine and a
glass of claret. Cover and let simmer until tender. Serve with toasted
croutons and currant jelly.


12.--Italian Macaroni.


Boil macaroni in salted water until tender. Drain. Then heat 2
tablespoonfuls of butter in a saucepan; add the macaroni, 1/2 cup of
chopped boiled tongue, 1/2 cup of chopped mushrooms, 1/2 cup of grated
cheese. Cover, let get very hot. Then mix a highly seasoned
tomato-sauce with a small glass of wine; let boil up and pour over the
macaroni. Serve hot with roast veal.


13.--Russian Stuffed Tongue.

Take fresh beef-tongue; make an incision with a sharp knife and fill
with chopped onions, bread-crumbs, a lump of butter, sage, thyme, salt
and pepper. Sew up and let boil until nearly done. Remove the skin.
Then stick cloves all over the tongue, and let cook until tender. Add
2 tablespoonfuls of vinegar and 1 tablespoonful of butter. Serve,
garnished with sliced beets, olives and sprigs of parsley.


14.--Hungarian Dumplings.

Mix 2 eggs with 1 tablespoonful of water, a pinch of salt and enough
sifted flour to make a stiff dough. Roll out on a well-floured
baking-board as thin as possible. Cut into three-inch squares and fill
with the following mixture: 1 cup of cottage cheese; mix with 1
tablespoonful of butter, 2 beaten eggs, sugar, cinnamon and nutmeg to
taste. Fill the dumplings, press the edges well together. Boil some
milk, seasoned with a pinch of salt and sugar to taste. Lay in the
dumplings and boil until done. Serve with the sauce.


15.--German Stewed Fish.

Clean the fish. Cut into large slices; salt well and sprinkle with
black pepper and let stew with sliced onion, some celery and parsley.
Add a few slices of lemon; let cook fifteen minutes to the pound; then
mix 1 tablespoonful of flour with 2 tablespoonfuls of butter; add to
the fish. Let cook five minutes more and serve hot or cold.


16.--French Stuffed Partridge.

Clean, singe and draw young partridges. Season and stuff each bird
with chopped oysters well seasoned, and sprinkle with parsley. Put a
small piece of butter in each bird; place the birds in a baking-pan;
cover with thin slices of bacon; add a little hot water and bake in a
hot oven until done. Serve with toast.


17.--Russian Pickled Herring.

Soak 1 dozen herring over night in water; then mash the milch and roes
and mix with 4 tablespoonfuls of brown sugar. Put the herring in a
large dish with 2 large onions sliced; make alternate layers of
herring, onions and sliced lemon, 8 bay-leaves, a few cloves, whole
peppers and some mustard seed. Pour over all some vinegar. Ready to
serve in five hours. Will keep for one week. Serve with
boiled potatoes.


18.--Hungarian Duck.

Season and roast the duck; then cut into pieces for serving. Chop the
giblets; add to the gravy in which the duck was roasted, with 1 glass
of red wine, 1/4 teaspoonful of paprica, a pinch of cloves and the
juice of a lemon. Let boil; add the sliced duck and let simmer until
tender. Serve hot; garnish with fried croutons.


19.--Venison a la Parisienne.

Cut venison into pieces. Heat 2 tablespoonfuls of butter; add 1 onion,
1 bay-leaf, 2 sprigs of parsley, and 2 of thyme, all chopped fine. Add
the venison, salt and pepper. Let all fry a few minutes; then add 1
cup of consomme and let simmer until tender. Add 1/2 glass of sherry
and 1/2 can of chopped mushrooms. Let all get very hot and serve with
toasted croutons.


20.--Jewish Boiled Fish.

Clean and season a large fish with salt and pepper and let cook with 1
cup of vinegar, 1 large onion, 2 sprigs of parsley and 2 of thyme, 1
tablespoonful of butter, 1/2 cup of raisins, a few cloves, 1 lemon
sliced and 1 teaspoonful of prepared mustard. Let cook until done.
Remove the fish; add 2 large pickles chopped and 1/4 cup of sugar, and
thicken with the yolks of 2 eggs well beaten. Serve hot or cold,
garnished with parsley.


21.--English Stuffed Duck.

Clean and season the duck; then chop the giblets. Add 1 onion, some
celery and parsley. Mix with 1 cup of bread-crumbs and a beaten egg.
Season this highly and fill the duck. Put in the dripping-pan with
some hot water, 1/2 glass of sherry and a lump of butter. Sprinkle
with flour; bake until done. Serve with apple-sauce.


22.--French Stewed Rabbits.

Skin and clean the rabbits; cut into pieces at the joints; season
well. Heat 2 tablespoonfuls of drippings in a stew-pan; add the
rabbits, 1 onion and 2 cloves of garlic sliced fine, 1 bay-leaf, 2
sprigs of parsley and thyme. Let all brown a few minutes; then add 1
cup of hot water and cook slowly until tender. Thicken the sauce with
flour and butter; add a glass of claret; boil up and serve.


23.--Italian Salad.

Cut 1 pound of cooked veal in very small pieces; add 1 herring that
has been soaked in milk, 3 cooked potatoes, 2 pickles, 3 boiled beets,
3 apples, 2 stalks of celery, 1 cooked carrot. Pour over a mayonnaise
dressing and garnish with sliced hard-boiled eggs, olives and capers.


24.--Hungarian Stewed Pigeons.

Season the pigeons and stuff with chopped chicken. Let stew slowly
with chopped onions, chives, celery and parsley; add salt and paprica
to taste. Cook until tender. Serve hot with beet salad.


25.--Vienna Baked Goose Breast.

Take the breast of the goose and cut the meat from the bone; chop fine
with some onion, 1 clove of garlic, parsley and a little thyme, salt,
black pepper and paprica. Mix with 2 eggs and fine bread-crumbs. Put
the chopped breast mixture back on the bone. Place in a baking-dish;
pour over some dripping; sprinkle with flour and bake until brown.
Serve with sour apple compote.


26.--Italian Veal and Macaroni.

Season tender veal cutlets with salt and red pepper and saute in hot
olive-oil; then cover and simmer until tender. Boil macaroni until
tender; drain. Add the macaroni to the veal with 1 cup of stock, and 3
tablespoonfuls of chopped cheese. Let all simmer ten minutes. Put on a
platter and cover with bread-crumbs fried in butter. Serve hot.


27.--French Squirrel Fricassee.

Cut the squirrels into pieces at the joints; sprinkle well with salt;
let lay one hour; then sprinkle with pepper and lemon-juice. Put 2
large tablespoonfuls of dripping in a pan; when hot, lay in a squirrel
with 1 sliced onion; cover and let brown. Then add 1 cup of
tomato-sauce, some celery seed and chopped parsley and 1 cup of hot
water. Let simmer until tender. Add 1/2 glass of sherry wine. Let get
very hot and serve with French peas.


28.--Irish Mutton Stew.

Season mutton chops with salt and pepper; put a tablespoonful of hot
drippings in a saucepan; add the chops, some sliced turnips, potatoes
and onions, salt and pepper. Then cover with water and cook slowly
until tender. Thicken the sauce with a little flour mixed with 1/2 cup
of milk. Season to taste and serve very hot.


29.--German Bread Pudding.

Crumb a stale loaf of bread to make 2 cupfuls and soak in 1 quart of
milk. Beat the yolks of 4 eggs with 1 cup of powdered sugar; add the
bread, a small cup of raisins and the grated peel of a lemon. Mix all
well. Put in a well-buttered pudding-dish and bake until brown. Beat
the whites with a pinch of salt, sugar and a little lemon-juice spread
on the top. Let get light brown in the oven. Serve with wine sauce.


30.--Hungarian Spice Cakes.

Sift 1 pound of flour; beat the yolks of 4 eggs with 1 pound of sugar;
add 1/2 ounce cinnamon, 1/2 ounce of ginger, 1/4 teaspoonful of
cloves, some grated lemon peel and a pinch of salt. Make all into a
dough and roll into small cakes about an inch in diameter. Put on
well-buttered baking-plates, sprinkled with flour, and bake in a
moderate oven until a rich brown. Serve with wine.


31.--French Braised Sweetbread.

Parboil the sweetbreads; drain. Put in the baking-pan with a piece of
salt pork, 1 onion, 1 carrot, 1 bay-leaf and a sprig of thyme, all cut
fine. Sprinkle with pepper, dredge with flour; add 1/2 cup of stock.
Let cook in the oven until done. Serve with mushrooms.






Back to Full Books