365 Foreign DishesbyUnknown




Produced by Andrew Heath, Joshua Hutchinson, Audrey Longhurst
and PG Distributed Proofreaders




365 FOREIGN DISHES


A Foreign Dish for every day in the year


1908




_JANUARY._


1.--Austrian Goulasch.

Boil 2 calves' heads in salted water until tender; then cut the meat
from the bone. Fry 1 dozen small peeled onions and 3 potatoes, cut
into dice pieces; stir in 1 tablespoonful of flour and the sauce in
which the meat was cooked. Let boil up, add the sliced meat, 1
teaspoonful of paprica and salt to taste; let all cook together
fifteen minutes then serve very hot.


2.--East India Fish.

Slice 1/2 pound of cooked salmon; then heat 1 ounce of butter in a
stew-pan; add 2 small onions chopped fine, 1 ounce of cocoanut, 2
hard-boiled eggs chopped. Let cook a few minutes, then add 1 pint of
milk; let boil up once. Add the fish, 1 teaspoonful of curry paste, 1
teaspoonful of paprica and salt to taste. Let cook a few minutes, then
stir in 1 large tablespoonful of boiled rice. Serve very hot
with toast.


3.--English Gems.

Cream 1 cup of butter with 2 cups of brown sugar; add 4 beaten eggs, 1
teaspoonful of soda dissolved in 1 large cup of strong coffee, 1 cup
of molasses, 4 cups of sifted flour, 1/2 teaspoonful each of nutmeg,
allspice, cloves and mace, 2 teaspoonfuls of cream of tartar sifted
with 1/2 cup of flour, 1 cup of raisins, 1/2 cup of currants and
chopped citron. Mix well and fill buttered gem pans 1/2 full and bake
until done. Then cover with chocolate icing.


4.--Turkish Pudding.

Dissolve 1/2 box of gelatin; chop 1/4 pound of dates and mix with 2
ounces of boiled rice, 1/2 cup of pulverized sugar and 1 teaspoonful
of vanilla; then mix the gelatin with 1 pint of whipped cream. Mix all
well together and turn into a mold and stand on ice until cold.
Sprinkle with chopped nuts. Serve with whipped cream.


5.--Chinese Chicken.

Cut a fat chicken into pieces at the joints; season with all kinds of
condiments; then put in a deep saucepan. Add some chopped ham, a few
sliced bamboo sprouts, 1 chopped onion and a handful of walnuts. Cover
with hot water and let stew slowly until tender. Add some Chinese
sauce and parsley. Serve with shredded pineapple.


6.--Scotch Scones.

Sift 1-1/2 pints of flour; add a pinch of salt, 1 teaspoonful of soda
mixed with 1 pint of sour milk. Mix to a soft dough. Lay on a
well-floured baking-board and roll 1 inch thick. Cut with a round
cake-cutter and bake on a hot greased griddle until brown on both
sides. Serve hot with butter.


7.--Egyptian Meat Balls.

Chop 1 pound of raw beef; season with salt, pepper and 1 teaspoonful
of curry-powder; add 2 stalks of chopped celery, 1 small onion and
some chopped parsley. Mix with 2 beaten eggs and 1/2 cup of
bread-crumbs, and make into small balls. Let cook in hot butter until
tender. Serve on a border of boiled rice and pour over all a highly
seasoned tomato-sauce.


8.--Austrian Potato Dumplings.

Peel 5 potatoes and boil whole in salted water until tender. Drain,
let get cold, then grate them and mix with 4 eggs and 1 ounce of
butter; add salt to taste. Mix well; add flour enough to form into
dumplings and fry in deep hot lard until brown. Serve hot with
cooked fruit.


9.--Belgian Rice Dessert.

Cook 1 pint of milk; add 1/2 cup of boiled rice and some currants;
stir in the yolks of 2 eggs well beaten with 2 tablespoonfuls of
sugar. Remove from the fire. Add 1 teaspoonful of vanilla; then form
into cylinders. Dip in beaten egg and fine bread-crumbs and fry a
golden brown. Sprinkle with pulverized sugar and put some red currant
jelly on top and serve.


10.--Bavarian Pear Pudding.

Soak 1/2 loaf of bread and press dry. Mix with 1/2 pound of chopped
suet; add a teaspoonful of salt, 1 cup of sugar, 2 eggs and the grated
peel of a lemon, a pinch of cinnamon, cloves and allspice. Add some
sifted flour; mix well, and form into a large ball. Then peel 1 quart
of pears. Cut in half, and lay in a large saucepan a layer of pears;
sprinkle with sugar, cinnamon and grated lemon peel. Lay in the
pudding; cover with a layer of pears and pour over all 3
tablespoonfuls of syrup. Fill with cold water and boil half an hour;
then bake three hours and serve hot.


11.--French Pineapple Bisque.

Beat the yolks of 4 eggs with 1 cup of pulverized sugar; add 1 pint of
cream; stir well until very light. Then add 1 small can of shredded
pineapple and crush a few macaroons. Mix well with a small glass of
brandy. Let freeze and serve in small glasses.


12.--Russian Pancakes.

Make a pancake batter and fry in thin cakes. Then spread them with a
layer of anchovies, butter and a layer of caviare. Sprinkle with
minced shallots, cayenne pepper and lemon-juice. Roll up and serve hot
as possible.


13.--Egyptian Cabbage.

Parboil a cabbage in salted water; drain and stuff with chopped cooked
mutton. Mix with chopped ham, 1 onion and 2 sprigs of parsley chopped
fine. Add 1/2 cup of cooked rice, salt and pepper to taste. Place in a
buttered baking-dish; sprinkle with bits of butter; add the juice of a
lemon, and let bake in a moderate oven until done. Baste often with
butter and serve hot.


14.--Madras Baked Fish.

Season a fish with salt, pepper, some grated green ginger and
curry-powder. Place in a baking-pan with 1 sliced onion, 2 chopped
green peppers and 1 sprig of parsley. Pour over some water and hot
melted butter; sprinkle with flour and bake until done. Garnish with
sliced lemon and parsley.


15.--Norwegian Salad.

Cut some pickled herring into pieces and mix with flaked lax, 2 peeled
apples and 2 boiled potatoes. Cut into dice pieces; add some chopped
shallots and gherkins; sprinkle with finely minced tarragon and
chervil, salt and pepper. Cover with a plain salad dressing.


16.--Dutch Eggs.

Heat some butter in a pan; then break in as many eggs as needed and
fry them; add some sliced onions. Remove the eggs to a platter;
arrange the onions on the eggs; sprinkle with salt and red pepper and
pour over some lemon-juice. Serve as hot as possible on toast.


17.--Bavarian Wine Soup.

Mix 3 pints of red wine with 1 pint of water. Add sugar, nutmeg and
cinnamon to taste and the grated peel of half a lemon. Let come to a
boil; then stir in the yolks of 2 well-beaten eggs. Do not boil again.
Serve hot with biscuits.


18.--English Stuffed Goose.

Season a fat goose with salt and pepper, and rub well with vinegar.
Then core small apples and fill the goose with the whole apples. Put
in the baking-pan, sprinkle with flour; pour over 1 cup of hot water;
add a lump of butter and bake until done. Baste often with the sauce
in the pan. Serve the goose with the whole apples.


19.--Vienna Peach Torte.

Make a rich pie-dough; then line a pie-dish with the dough. Pare and
remove the stones from the peaches and cut into quarters. Lay closely
on the pie; sprinkle with brown sugar and moisten with wine. Bake in a
moderate oven until done. Then spread with a meringue and let brown in
the oven a few minutes.


20.--Egyptian Meat-Pie.

Line a large baking-dish with pie-dough. Have ready 1/2 pound of
calf's liver chopped, and 1/2 pound of fresh pork chopped fine. Season
highly and mix with 1/2 cup of butter, 2 green peppers, 1 onion
chopped and 1/2 can of chopped mushrooms. Moisten with a glass of
sherry. Fill the dish with the mixture and cover with the dough. Let
bake until done and serve hot.


21.--Russian Boiled Fish.

Clean and season a whole fish and let boil with 1 sliced onion, 1/2
cup of vinegar, a few slices of lemon and 2 sprigs of parsley. Add a
tablespoonful of butter and let cook until tender. Remove the fish to
a platter; mix the sauce with 1 tablespoonful of brown sugar, a pinch
of ginger, cinnamon and nutmeg and the juice of a lemon. Let boil
well; then thicken with the yolks of 2 beaten eggs and pour over the
fish. Serve cold. Garnish with lemon-slices and olives.


22.--Spanish Cake.

Beat 1 pound of butter with 1 pound of sugar to a cream. Add the yolks
of 8 eggs well beaten. Sift 1 pound of flour with 2 teaspoonfuls of
baking-powder and stir together with 1 cup of milk. Add the whites of
eggs, beaten to a stiff froth with a pinch of salt. Flavor with
rose-water. Bake in a moderate oven until done.


23.--Vienna Stewed Carrots.

Peel some carrots and cut in small pieces. Boil in salted water until
tender; drain. Brown 1 tablespoonful of flour in 2 tablespoonfuls of
butter; add 1/2 cup of the water in which the carrots were cooked, 2
tablespoonfuls of vinegar and a little sugar. Let all boil; then add
the carrots and 1 cup of cooked peas, some chopped parsley and a pinch
of pepper. Simmer ten minutes and serve hot.


24.--Russian Fish-Roll.

Chop some cooked trout and white fish, and mix with 1/2 cup of boiled
rice. Season with salt, pepper and all kinds of herbs minced fine.
Then make a rich pie-paste and roll out very thin. Fill with the
mixture and make into a roll. Sprinkle with bits of butter and let
bake until brown. Serve hot with wine-sauce.


25.--India Curried Eggs.

Cut hard-boiled eggs in halves; then fry 1 small chopped onion and 1
chopped apple in hot butter; add 1/4 cup of pounded almonds and 1 pint
of milk, mixed with 1/2 tablespoonful of cornstarch. Season with salt
and a dessertspoonful of curry-powder. Let cook ten minutes; then add
the eggs. Let all get very hot. Serve with croutons; garnish with
fried parsley.


26.--Codfish a la Lyonnaise.

Cut cold boiled codfish in pieces; then boil 8 small onions until
soft; heat 2 tablespoonfuls of butter. Add the boiled onions, 2 small
cold sliced potatoes, the codfish and 1 cup of milk; sprinkle with
pepper. Cover and simmer ten minutes and serve hot.


27.--Jewish Crebchen Soup.

Beat 3 eggs with 2 tablespoonfuls of water and a pinch of salt; then
add enough flour to make a stiff dough. Work it well with flour and
roll out as thin as possible; fold it double and cut into square
pieces and fill with minced cooked chicken or veal. Sprinkle with
chopped parsley and bits of butter; fold in the edges. Have ready some
soup stock; when boiling, add the crebchen and let boil until done.
Serve with the soup.


28.--French Veal Souffle.

Heat 2 tablespoonfuls of butter. Mix with 2 tablespoonfuls of flour
until smooth; add 1 cup of milk; let boil up. Then add 1 cup of minced
veal, some parsley, salt, pepper and nutmeg to taste. Stir in the
yolks of 2 eggs. Remove from the fire; let cool. Beat the whites to a
stiff froth; add to the meat. Put in a buttered baking-dish and bake
twenty minutes. Serve at once.


29.--Belgian Potato Salad.

Slice cold boiled potatoes very thin and mix with chopped celery and
onion; season with salt and pepper. Then mix the yolks of 2
hard-boiled eggs with 1 tablespoonful of olive-oil. Add to the salad
with 2 tablespoonfuls of vinegar. Sprinkle with chopped parsley
and serve.


30.--Polish Stewed Tongue.

Cook a fresh tongue until tender; skin and slice thin. Put a large
spoonful of butter in a saucepan; add a chopped onion; let brown. Then
stir in 1 tablespoonful of flour; add 2 cups of the water in which the
tongue was cooked, a pinch of nutmeg and cinnamon. Let boil with the
juice of 1 lemon, 2 tablespoonfuls of vinegar and 1 tablespoonful of
sugar. Add the sliced tongue and simmer ten minutes. Serve hot
or cold.


31.--Rissotto (ITALIAN).

Boil 1 cup of rice in salted water until soft; drain. Then grate
Parmesan cheese and cover the rice with cheese. Let steam in the oven
a few minutes; then pour over some highly seasoned tomato-sauce, and
serve hot with fried veal chops.




_FEBRUARY._


1.--Oriental Canapes.

Take some lobster or crab-meat and pound in a mortar. Mix with 1
tablespoonful of butter; season with salt and pepper, a pinch each of
mustard, cayenne, nutmeg and curry-powder and moisten with
lemon-juice. Cut small rounds of toasted bread; scoop out some of the
centre; fill with the mixture and cover with a curry sauce. Sprinkle
with fine bread-crumbs and let bake in the oven a few minutes.
Serve hot.


2.--Haggis (SCOTCH).

Chop a sheep's tongue, liver and heart and 1 pound of bacon. Add 2
large chopped onions; season with 1/4 teaspoonful of red pepper and 1
teaspoonful of mixed herbs and salt to taste. Mix with 1 pint of
toasted oatmeal, 2 beaten eggs and the grated rind and juice of a
lemon. Then clean the pouch of the sheep and fill with the mixture.
Lay in boiling water and let boil three hours. Serve with apple-sauce.


3.--Austrian Braised Tongue.

Boil a large fresh beef tongue in salted water until tender. Remove
the tongue and lard it with thin strips of bacon; sprinkle with
paprica; lay in a baking-pan; add 1 onion sliced thin and 1 cup of the
water in which the tongue was cooked and pour over 1 pint of cream.
Let bake in a moderate oven. Baste often with the sauce. Serve hot,
and pour over the sauce; garnish with parsley.


4.--Russian Omelet.

Chop 2 shallots with a little parsley and cook in hot water. Add 2
tablespoonfuls of caviare and a teaspoonful of lemon-juice; season to
taste. Beat 4 eggs with 1 tablespoonful of cream, salt and pepper, and
fry in an omelet-pan with hot butter until done. Put the mixture in
the centre; turn in the ends and serve at once.


5.--Madras Potato Curry.

Cut boiled potatoes into thin slices; then fry 1 chopped onion in 2
tablespoonfuls of butter. Add 3 ounces of grated cocoanut, 1
teaspoonful of curry-powder and 1 cup of milk, salt and cayenne pepper
to taste. Let boil up. Add the sliced potatoes and a sprig of parsley
chopped. Let simmer a few minutes and serve hot.


6.--Swiss Baked Eggs.

Melt 1 ounce of butter in a baking-pan; then cover the bottom of the
pan with thin slices of Swiss cheese. Break in 6 eggs; sprinkle with
salt and pepper. Pour over 4 tablespoonfuls of cream; sprinkle with
grated Swiss cheese, and let bake in the oven to a delicate brown.
Serve hot.


7.--Jewish Stewed Shad.

Clean and cut a shad into large slices; sprinkle with salt, pepper and
ginger. Put on to boil with 1 sliced onion, 1 bay-leaf, a few cloves,
2 sprigs of parsley and 1/2 cup of vinegar. When done, remove the fish
to a platter; add 1/2 cup of raisins, 1 tablespoonful of butter, 1/2
cup of pounded almonds, 1 glass of wine, 1 tablespoonful of brown
sugar and a pinch of cinnamon. Let boil until done and pour over the
fish. Garnish with sliced lemon and sprigs of parsley and serve cold.


8.--Bombay Spinach.

Boil the spinach in salted water until tender; drain and chop fine.
Fry 1 chopped onion in 2 tablespoonfuls of butter; add the chopped
spinach, a pinch of pepper and curry-powder. Cover and let simmer five
minutes. Serve on a platter with stewed prawns and garnish
with croutons.


9.--Spanish Fricasseed Shrimps.

Heat 2 tablespoonfuls of butter; add 1 onion chopped and 2 cups of
tomatoes. Let fry; then stir in 1 tablespoonful of flour; add 1/2 cup
of water; let boil; add 1 quart of shrimps, salt, pepper and parsley.
Let all cook twenty minutes. Stir in the yolk of an egg. Remove from
the fire. Put some boiled rice on a platter; add the shrimps and pour
over the sauce. Serve very hot.


10.--Irish Baked Potatoes.

Peel and boil potatoes in salted water until tender; drain and mash
with a lump of butter. Put in a well-buttered baking-dish a layer of
the potatoes and a layer of fried bread-crumbs until dish is full.
Moisten with beaten eggs, well seasoned with salt and pepper, and 3
tablespoonfuls of milk. Put in the oven to brown. Serve with
boiled fish.


11.--Russian Stewed Chicken.

Cut a fat chicken into pieces at the joints and let stew, well
seasoned with salt and pepper. Then add some small whole onions, some
cauliflower, mushrooms and 1 cup of French peas. Let all cook until
tender; then serve hot on a large platter.


12.--Dutch Baked Mackerel.

Place the mackerel in a baking-dish; sprinkle with pepper and chopped
parsley. Cover with fried bread-crumbs and bits of butter, and moisten
with cream. Then bake until brown on top and serve hot with
stewed potatoes.


13.--Polish Roast Mutton.

Season a leg of mutton with salt, pepper and a pinch of cloves. Lay in
a baking-pan with 1 sliced onion, 2 celery roots, 3 cloves of garlic
and 2 carrots cut fine, 1 bay-leaf, a sprig of thyme and a few
peppercorns. Pour over 1 cup of vinegar and 1 cup of hot water. Dredge
with flour and let bake in a hot oven. Baste often with the sauce in
the pan until nearly done; then add 1 pint of sour cream and let bake
until done. Thicken with flour; boil up and pour over the roast.


14.--Italian Sugar Cakes.

Beat 1-1/2 pounds of sugar and 1/2 pound of butter to a cream; add 4
yolks of eggs, a pinch of salt and nutmeg. Stir in 1/2 pound of flour,
4 ounces of currants, 2 ounces of chopped almonds, 1 tablespoonful of
citron and candied orange peel chopped fine. Add the whites beaten
stiff and bake in small well-buttered cake-tins until done; then cover
with a thin icing.


15.--Oriental Stewed Prawns.

Clean and pick 3 dozen prawns. Heat some dripping in a large saucepan;
add the prawns, 1 chopped onion, salt, pepper and 1 teaspoonful of
curry-powder. Add 1 pint of stock and let simmer half an hour until
tender. Serve on a border of boiled rice; garnish with fried parsley.


16.--Swiss Steak.

Season a round steak with salt, black pepper and paprica; dredge with
flour and let fry in hot lard on both sides until brown. Then add some
sliced onions and moisten well with tomato-sauce. Cover and let simmer
half an hour. Serve hot on a platter with mashed potatoes.


17.--Berlin Herring Salad.

Soak the herring over night; remove the milch and mash fine. Cut off
the head, skin and bone; chop the herring; add chopped apples,
pickles, potatoes, olives and capers. Put in the salad bowl; then add
the yolk of a hard-boiled egg to the mashed milch, mustard, 1
teaspoonful of sugar mixed with 1/4 cup of vinegar and a little
lemon-juice, salt and pepper. Pour the sauce over the salad and
garnish with olives and sliced lemon.


18.--German Lentil Soup.

To 1 gallon of soup stock, add 1 quart of lentils. Let boil until
lentils are soft, with 1 sliced onion. Then add some small sausages.
Let boil five minutes. Season to taste and serve the soup with the
sausages and croutons fried in butter.


19.--French Spiced Venison.

Rub the venison with salt, pepper, vinegar, cloves and allspice; then
put in a baking-pan. Pour over a cup of melted butter; add 1 onion
sliced, some thyme, parsley, the juice of a lemon, and a cup of hot
water. Let bake, covered, in a hot oven. Baste often with the sauce
when nearly done. Sprinkle with flour; add a glass of sherry and let
brown. Serve with celery and currant jelly.


20.--Spanish Mushrooms.

Drain 1 can of mushrooms and heat 2 tablespoonfuls of butter. Add 6
shallots and 1 clove of garlic chopped fine, some parsley and thyme
and the mushrooms. Let all fry a few minutes; then add the mushroom
liquor and 2 tablespoonfuls of white wine, salt and pepper to taste.
Let simmer five minutes and serve hot on slices of toast.


21.--Vienna Noodle Pudding.

Boil some fine noodles in salted water for ten minutes; let drain.
Beat the yolks of 5 eggs with 1 cup of pulverized sugar and mix with
the noodles. Add 1/2 cup of raisins, 1/2 cup of pounded almonds, a
pinch of cinnamon and the whites of the eggs beaten to a froth. Put in
a well-buttered pudding-dish and bake until brown. Serve hot with
lemon sauce.


22.--Dutch Sweet Potato Puff.

Peel and boil 3 sweet potatoes in salted water until tender; then mash
well with 3 beaten yolks of eggs, 1 cup of milk, 3 tablespoonfuls of
butter, 2 tablespoonfuls of sugar, a pinch of nutmeg and lemon-juice.
Beat the whites with a pinch of salt to a stiff froth; add to the
potatoes and put in a well buttered baking-dish and bake. Serve hot.


23.--Spaghetti (ITALIAN).

Boil 1/2 pound of spaghetti until tender. Drain. Heat 1 tablespoonful
of butter, stir in 1/2 pound of grated cheese, salt and pepper. Then
add 1 cup of milk; let boil and pour over the spaghetti. Sprinkle with
salt, pepper and grated cheese and let bake in the oven until done.
Serve hot.


24.--Russian Beet Soup.

Boil 5 medium-sized beets until tender; then chop and add to a highly
seasoned chicken broth. Add the juice of 1 lemon, some cinnamon and
nutmeg; let boil fifteen minutes. Then add 1 glass of red wine, mixed
with a teaspoonful of brown sugar. Let boil a few minutes longer and
serve with fried croutons.


25.--Boulettes.

Chop and mince 1 pound of round steak, 1 onion and 2 sprigs of
parsley. Add 1 tablespoonful of lemon-juice, 2 tablespoonfuls of
melted butter. Season highly with salt, black pepper and a pinch of
cayenne. Mix with 1 egg and form into balls; roll in flour and fry in
deep hot lard until brown. Serve hot with tomato-sauce.


26.--Baden Stewed Lentils.

Boil 1 quart of lentils until tender; then heat 2 tablespoonfuls of
butter. Add 1 chopped onion and stir in 1 tablespoonful of flour until
brown; add some cold water mixed with vinegar. Let boil and pour the
sauce over the lentils. Season with salt and pepper, and serve with
small boiled sausages. Sprinkle the top with bread-crumbs fried in
butter until brown.


27.--Duck aux Champignons.

Clean and season a pair of wild ducks and cut into pieces at the
joints. Heat 2 tablespoonfuls of butter in a saucepan; add the ducks,
1 large onion chopped fine, 2 cloves of garlic and 1 herb bouquet
chopped. Cover and brown a few minutes; add 1 cup of water and stew
until tender. Then add 1/2 can of mushrooms and 1 glass of claret and
let simmer until done.


28.--Hungarian Beef Stew.

Cut beef into small pieces. Heat some dripping in a saucepan; add the
meat, salt and black pepper; cover and let stew half an hour. Then add
3 potatoes cut into dice pieces, 1 onion sliced thin, 1 cup of hot
water, and 1/2 teaspoonful of paprica. Let all cook until tender. Then
add some chopped parsley and thicken the sauce with flour, mixed in
1/2 cup of milk. Let cook a few minutes and serve hot.




_MARCH._


1.--Chicken Chop Suey (CHINESE).

Cut all the meat of a chicken into thin strips; season with black
pepper, and cayenne, and fry in hot lard. Add some ham, onion, celery,
green bean sprouts and mushrooms cut fine. Moisten with 1/2 cup of
stock. Add 1/4 cup of Chinese sauce; cover and let simmer until
tender. Thicken the sauce with flour; add 2 tablespoonfuls of cream
and chopped parsley. Serve hot on a platter with boiled rice.


2.--Jewish Shallet.

Line a well-buttered pudding-dish with a rich pie-paste and cover with
a layer of sliced apples. Sprinkle with cinnamon, grated lemon peel
and small bits of butter, and moisten with white wine; then cover with
a layer of the paste and fill with another layer of apples, nuts and
raisins, a tablespoonful of syrup, the juice of 1/2 lemon and bits of
butter. Cover with the top crust; press in the edges with a beaten
egg, and rub the top with butter. Let bake in a moderate oven
until done.


3.--Russian Relish.

Cut some slices of brown bread into fingers half an inch thick; spread
with butter. Mix some Russian caviare with lemon-juice to taste and a
tablespoonful of finely chopped shallots. Spread the fingers with the
mixture and place an oyster in the centre of each. Sprinkle with salt
and a pinch of paprica. Serve. Garnish with thin slices of lemon
and parsley.


4.--Dutch Stuffed Potatoes.

Select fine smooth potatoes; cut off the end of each and scrape out
the inside. Mix this with chopped ham, onion and parsley, and a
tablespoonful of butter. Season with salt, pepper and lemon-juice.
Fill the potato with the mixture and let bake in a moderate oven until
tender and serve hot.


5.--Fish a la Marseilles.

Cut two kinds of fish into slices; season with salt. Mince 2 cloves of
garlic, 2 sprigs of parsley, 2 sprigs of thyme and 2 bay-leaves very
fine. Add a pinch of pepper. Roll the fish in the spice. Then fry 2
sliced onions in butter; add 1 cup of tomatoes, the juice of a lemon
and 2 cups of water. Let boil up. Add the fish and let boil until
done. Remove the fish to a platter. Add a cup of white wine to the
sauce and 1 tablespoonful of sugar. Boil up and pour over the fish.
Serve with toast.


6.--Jewish Stewed Brains.

Clean and stew the brains with 1/2 cup of vinegar, 1 sliced onion,
salt and pepper. Add a tablespoonful of brown sugar, 1/2 cup of
raisins. Let stew until tender. Remove the brains to a platter; add a
lump of butter and a tablespoonful of molasses to the sauce; boil up
and pour over the brains. Serve cold; garnish with lemon slices.


7.--Austrian Apple Strudel.

Mix 1 pint of flour with 1/2 cup of water, 4 ounces of butter, 3 eggs
and a pinch of salt to a stiff dough; then roll out as thin as
possible. Pour over some melted butter; cover with chopped apples and
raisins. Sprinkle with sugar and cinnamon. Make a large roll; bake in
a buttered baking-pan with flakes of butter on top until brown.


8.--Vienna Nut Torte.

Blanch 1/4 pound of almonds and pound in a mortar. Then beat 4 eggs
with 1/2 cup of sugar. Add 1 teaspoonful of brandy and a teaspoonful
of wine and lemon-juice; add 4 lady fingers crumbled up fine. Beat all
together with the nuts; put in a well-buttered pudding-dish and bake.
Serve with wine sauce.


9.--Bavarian Cabbage Salad.

Chop a cabbage with 1 large onion and 2 stalks of celery and 2
peppers; season well with salt and sprinkle with pepper. Heat some
vinegar; add a teaspoonful of prepared mustard. Then beat the yolks of
2 eggs with a tablespoonful of sugar; add the hot vinegar slowly to
the beaten eggs and mix with the cabbage. Serve cold.


10.--Russian Stewed Duck.

Clean and cut the duck into pieces and season with salt and pepper;
then cut 1/2 pound of bacon into dice pieces and put in a large
saucepan with 1 onion and 2 carrots. Cut fine 1 herb bouquet, a few
cloves and a few peppercorns; add the duck. Let all cook slowly with 1
cup of stock until tender; then add 1 cup of red wine. Thicken the
sauce with flour, boil and serve hot.


11.--Russian Chicken Patties.

Chop the white meat of cooked chicken and turkey very fine and mix
with 3 chopped truffles and some chopped parsley. Season with the
grated peel of 1/2 lemon, a pinch of nutmeg, salt and pepper to taste,
and moisten with cream. Make a puff-paste and roll out very thin. Cut
into squares and fill with a tablespoonful of the mixture. Press the
ends together and fry in deep hot lard until a light brown. Drain and
serve very hot with tomato-sauce.


12.--Japanese Salad.

Cut some celery, apples and truffles into fine shreds and mix with
chrysanthemum flowers; season with salt and pepper. Put in a salad
bowl and cover with a mayonnaise dressing. Garnish with chopped
hard-boiled eggs and olives.


13.--Polish Chops.

Season veal chops with salt and pepper and let fry a few minutes in
hot dripping. Remove the chops and cover with a mixture of bacon,
liver, onions and parsley minced fine and well seasoned. Then let bake
in the oven with 1 cup of beef broth. Baste often and serve very hot.


14.--Spanish Stewed Rabbit.

Clean and parboil 2 rabbits; then cut into pieces. Sprinkle with flour
and fry in hot lard. Remove the rabbits. Add chopped tomato and onion
to the sauce; mix with flour; let fry; add the sauce in which the
rabbit was cooked, some lemon-juice, 1/2 teaspoonful of red pepper,
parsley and salt to taste. Cook ten minutes; then add the rabbit and
simmer five minutes. Serve hot with boiled rice.


15.--Scotch Baked Mutton.

Season a leg of mutton well with salt and pepper. Dredge with flour
and let bake in a hot oven until nearly done. Then add some boiled
turnips cut in quarters; sprinkle with pepper and flour; let bake
until browned. Serve the mutton on a platter with the turnips.


16.--Belgian Stuffed Shad.

Season and stuff the shad with chopped oysters and mushrooms well
seasoned. Place in a well-buttered baking-dish; sprinkle with fine
bread-crumbs, chopped onion and parsley. Put flakes of butter on top
and pour in 1 cup of tomato-sauce. Let bake until done. Baste often
with the sauce. Serve with celery salad with French dressing.


17.--Italian Roast Beef.

Cut several deep incisions in the upper round of beef and press into
them lardoons of salt pork. Stick 2 cloves of sliced garlic and 1
dozen cloves in the meat; season with salt and pepper and dredge with
flour. Put in the dripping-pan with some hot water and let roast until
tender. Serve with boiled macaroni.


18.--French Apple Souffle.

Cook apples and sweeten to taste. Mash well with 1 tablespoonful of
butter. Beat the yolks of 3 eggs with 2 tablespoonfuls of sugar, the
juice and rind of 1/2 lemon; add the whites beaten to a stiff froth.
Put in a buttered pudding-dish and bake in a moderate oven until done.


19.--German Sweet Pretzels.

Mix 1/2 pound of flour with 1/2 pound of fresh butter; add 1/4 pound
of sugar, 1 egg and 1 beaten yolk, 1 tablespoonful of sweet cream and
some grated lemon peel. Mix thoroughly and mold the dough into small
wreaths; brush the top with the yolk of an egg and sprinkle with
powdered sweet almonds. Lay in a well-buttered baking-tin and bake
until a deep yellow.


20.--French Waffles.

Sift 3 cups of flour with 1-1/2 teaspoonfuls of baking-powder and 1/2
teaspoonful of salt. Beat the yolks of 3 eggs; add a tablespoonful of
melted butter and 2 cups of warm milk. Add the beaten whites and stir
in the flour, making a light batter. Grease the waffle irons and fill
with the batter. Bake until a delicate brown. Remove to a hot dish.
Serve hot with powdered sugar on top.


21.--Swedish Stewed Mutton.

Season the breast of mutton with salt, pepper, thyme and mace; let
stew slowly with 1 onion and 2 cloves of garlic chopped. Add some
chopped capers and mushrooms; cook until tender. Then thicken the
sauce with flour mixed with a glass of wine and boil up. Serve hot
with baked turnips.


22.--Swedish Pie.

Make a rich pie-dough; line a deep pie-dish with the paste and let
bake. Then fill with chopped boiled fish, oysters, shrimps and some
chopped mushrooms. Sprinkle with salt and paprica and the grated peel
of a lemon. Pour over 1/4 cup of melted butter and the juice of 1/2
lemon and a beaten egg. Then cover with the dough and let bake until
done. Serve hot.


23.--Greek Stuffed Egg-Plant.

Parboil the egg-plant and cut in half. Scrape out some of the inside
and chop some cooked lamb, 2 green peppers, 1 onion, and 2 tomatoes.
Then mix with a beaten egg, 1 tablespoonful of butter, salt and pepper
to taste. Fill the halves with the mixture; sprinkle with bread-crumbs
and bits of butter. Put in a baking-dish with a little stock and bake.


24.--Norwegian Fish Pudding.

Remove the bones from a large cooked fish and chop to a fine mince.
Mix with 2 beaten eggs, 2 tablespoonfuls of cream, 1 tablespoonful of
butter, season with salt, black pepper and 1/4 teaspoonful of paprica.
Beat well together with some bread-crumbs; fill a mold with the
pudding and let steam one hour; then boil the sauce in which the fish
was cooked, add 1 tablespoonful of butter, chopped parsley and chopped
onion. Season highly; boil and serve with the pudding.


25.--Japanese Eggs.

Cook some rice in a rich chicken stock; place on a platter. Fry 6 eggs
and trim neatly; sprinkle with salt, black pepper, chopped parsley and
lemon-juice. Put the eggs on the rice and pour a little hot
tomato-sauce over the base of the platter and serve.


26.--Jewish Stewed Brisket.

Boil beef brisket until tender, and slice thin. Heat 2 tablespoonfuls
of butter; add 1 chopped onion. Stir in 1 tablespoonful of flour until
brown. Add the water in which the meat was cooked, 1/2 cup of raisins,
1/2 cup of vinegar, 1 tablespoonful of brown sugar and some cinnamon
and 1 carrot sliced thin, salt, pepper and a few cloves. Let boil. Add
the brisket and simmer fifteen minutes. Serve hot or cold.


27.--Hungarian Fruit Roll.

Make a pie-dough. Roll out and spread with melted butter, raisins,
currants, chopped apples, nuts and shredded citron. Cover well with
brown sugar and sprinkle with cinnamon and the grated peel of a lemon.
Roll up the dough. Lay in a buttered baking-pan. Rub the top well with
melted butter and let bake until brown. Serve with wine sauce.


28.--Dutch Stewed Fish.

Cook a large fish with 1 onion, 2 stalks of celery, parsley, a
tablespoonful of butter, salt and pepper until done. Remove fish to a
platter. Add 2 chopped pickles, the juice and rind of a lemon, 1/2 cup
of vinegar. Mash the yolks of 2 boiled eggs with 1 raw egg, a
teaspoonful of prepared mustard and a tablespoonful of butter. Add to
the sauce and boil. Lay the fish in the boiling sauce ten minutes;
then serve.


29.--Belgian Lamb Chops.

Season lamb chops; dredge with flour and fry until brown; keep hot.
Fry 1 chopped onion and 1 small carrot in two tablespoonfuls of
butter. Add 1 tablespoonful of flour; stir until light brown. Add 1/2
cup of water; let boil well; add parsley, a few cloves and
peppercorns, salt and pepper and 1 bay-leaf minced fine. Boil well.
Add 1 glass of claret; then pour the sauce hot over the chops, and
garnish with French peas.


30.--Austrian Apple Omelet.

Peel, core and slice some apples very thin. Heat 1 large tablespoonful
of butter in a frying-pan; put in the apples and let them steam until
tender. Make an egg omelet batter; sweeten to taste and pour over the
apples; let cook until set. Cover thickly with sugar and sprinkle with
cinnamon. Serve hot with wine sauce.


31.--Fish a la Normandie.

Boil a trout well seasoned; add 1 sliced onion, 1 carrot chopped, 2
sprigs of parsley and 1 bay-leaf, a few peppercorns and 1
tablespoonful of butter. When done, beat the yolks of 2 eggs with a
little cream; add salt and a pinch of cayenne. Remove the fish to a
platter. Mix the egg sauce with the water in which the fish was
cooked; add 1/2 cup of cream. Let get very hot and pour over the fish.
Garnish with parsley. Serve hot.




_APRIL._


1.--Italian Tongue.

Boil a beef tongue until tender; skin and slice thin. Heat 2
tablespoonfuls of butter. Add 1 chopped onion and 2 cloves of garlic
minced fine. Stir in 1 tablespoonful of flour until brown; add a
little water, 1 cup of tomato-sauce, 1/2 cup chopped mushrooms,
lemon-juice, salt and pepper to taste. Let boil. Add the sliced
tongue, and 1/2 glass of sherry wine. Simmer ten minutes. Serve with
baked macaroni.


2.--German Prune Pudding.

Cook 1 pound of prunes in a large saucepan with sliced lemon, a piece
of stick cinnamon and brown sugar. Soak 1/2 loaf of bread in water;
press out dry. Add 3 eggs, 1/4 teaspoonful each of cinnamon, cloves
and allspice. Add flour sifted with a teaspoonful of baking-powder.
Make into a large roll; place in the centre of the prunes; cover with
brown sugar and a tablespoonful of molasses and put in the oven to
bake until done. Serve hot or cold.


3.--Swiss Pot Roast.

Season a breast of veal with salt, pepper and ginger. Heat a cupful of
dripping; lay the meat in the stew-pan with the dripping, 1 onion,
some celery seed, carroway seed, a few peppercorns and parsley. Cover
and let stew slowly until nearly done; then add 1 cup of tomato-sauce
and cook slowly until tender. Serve with baked potatoes.


4.--Mushrooms a la Bordelaise.

Drain 1 can of mushrooms; chop 6 shallots very fine and saute in 1
tablespoonful of butter. Add the chopped mushrooms; sprinkle with
salt, pepper, some chopped parsley and 1 minced bay-leaf. Let cook ten
minutes with 1/2 glass of sherry wine. Serve hot on slices of
French toast.


5.--Turkish Soup.

Season and fry some lamb chops; add 2 green peppers sliced thin, 1
onion chopped and an herb bouquet. Then cook 1/2 cup of barley in 1
quart of soup stock until tender. Pour all together and let cook until
meat is very tender. Serve hot.


6.--Scotch Omelet.

Boil young tender leeks in salted water; let drain. Chop to a fine
mince and fry in hot butter. Add 6 well-beaten eggs, sprinkle with
salt and pepper and fold into an omelet and serve on a hot dish.


7.--Jewish Egg Bread.

Soak some matzoths in milk for a few minutes; then dip them into
seasoned beaten eggs. Add a pinch of sugar and let them fry in hot
rendered butter until a golden brown. Sprinkle with pulverized sugar
and cinnamon and serve hot with coffee.


8.--Bombay Broiled Kidney.

Clean sheep's kidneys and cut into thin slices. Sprinkle with salt,
cayenne pepper and grated lemon peel. Then dip in beaten egg and fine
bread-crumbs and broil on a hot greased gridiron. Serve on buttered
toast, spread with curry paste.


9.--German Prune Kuchen.

Boil some prunes until tender. Remove the kernels and mash the prunes
well. Mix with sugar, cinnamon and lemon-juice to taste. Make a rich
biscuit dough, roll out and place on a well-buttered baking-pan. Fill
with the prunes and let bake until done. Serve cold.


10.--French Roast with Carrots.

Lard a round of beef with slices of bacon and put in a large saucepan.
Cover and let brown a few minutes. Add sliced onion and boiling water
to cover. Let cook slowly until tender; then scrape 6 carrots and cut
thin; add 2 sliced onions, 2 cloves of garlic and let cook until
tender. Thicken with butter and flour. Season highly with salt, pepper
and parsley; add to the meat, and let all cook together a half hour
and serve hot.


11.--Spanish Fried Chicken.

Cut a fat hen into pieces at the joints and boil until tender; season
and fry with 1 onion and 2 green peppers chopped fine. Add 1 cup of
tomato-sauce, salt and pepper to taste. Serve the chicken on a platter
with boiled rice.


12.--Hungarian Bread Pudding.

Chop 1/2 cup of suet. Mix with 1/2 loaf of stale bread that has been
soaked and pressed dry. Add 1 cup of chopped apples, 1 cup of sugar,
1/2 cup of chopped raisins and nuts. Sprinkle with cinnamon, nutmeg
and grated lemon peel; then mix with the yolks of 4 eggs and the
whites beaten stiff. Put in a well-buttered pudding-dish, and let bake
until done. Serve hot with wine sauce.


13.--Swedish Baked Turnips.

Peel small tender turnips; heat 1 tablespoonful of butter in a
saucepan. Place the turnips in whole, sprinkle with salt and pepper;
add a tablespoonful of sugar. Pour over a cup of water; cover and let
cook for one hour until tender but not broken. Thicken the sauce with
flour and milk. Add a little water and set in the oven a half hour,
covered with paper; then serve.


14.--Belgian Baked Bananas.

Skin fine bananas and lay them whole in a baking-dish. Sprinkle with
sugar and grated lemon peel. Add the juice of 1 orange, 1/2 lemon and
1/2 glass of sherry wine. Let bake in a quick oven. Put the bananas in
a glass dish and pour over the sauce. Let get cold and serve.


15.--Japanese Rice.

Boil 1 cup of rice; add 3 chopped shallots, 1 teaspoonful of soy and
salt to taste. Place on a platter, cover with chopped hard-boiled
eggs, sprinkle with salt, paprica and chopped parsley. Garnish with
some thin slices of smoked salmon.


16.--Scotch Loaf Cake.

Mix 1/2 pound of butter with 1/4 pound of sugar, 1/2 cup of chopped
nuts and 1/2 cup of shredded citron; then work in 1 pound of sifted
flour with 2 teaspoonfuls of baking-powder. Make a loaf a half inch
thick and bake in a moderate oven until done.


17.--English Meat Loaf.

Chop cooked veal and boiled ham; place in a well-greased mold
alternate layers of veal, ham and hard-boiled eggs. Sprinkle with
pepper, mace and chopped parsley. Moisten with beef-stock and let bake
in the oven. Serve cold, sliced very thin, garnished with watercress.


18.--Jewish Purim Cakes.

Beat 1 cup of sugar with 1/2 cup of butter to a cream; add 2 beaten
eggs, a pinch of salt, 1/2 cup of milk and the grated peel of 1/2
lemon. Add enough sifted flour with 1 teaspoonful of baking-powder to
make a soft biscuit dough. Put on a well-floured baking-board. Roll
out a half inch thick. Cut into triangles and drop in a kettle of hot
rendered butter; fry until a golden brown. Then mix some powdered
sugar with a little milk and flavor with vanilla. Spread on the top.


19.--Swiss Pie.

Make a rich pie-dough. Line a buttered pie-dish with the dough; then
slice three onions very thin and let cook in hot butter until tender;
add a pinch of salt. Fill the pie with the onions, cover the top with
cream and let bake in a moderate oven until done. Serve hot or cold.


20.--French Apple Fritters.

Peel and slice large apples; sprinkle with sugar and lemon-juice and
make a rich egg batter. Sweeten to taste and flavor with 2
tablespoonfuls of orange-flower water. Lay the sliced apples in the
batter and fry in deep hot lard to a golden brown. Serve with
wine sauce.


21.--Jewish Purim Torte.

Line a well-buttered baking-dish with a rich pie-paste. Then mix 1 cup
of fine poppy-seeds with the yolks of 5 eggs and 1/2 cup of sugar,
some chopped raisins and nuts and the juice of 1/2 lemon. Add the
whites beaten stiff; then fill with the mixture and let bake
until done.


22.--English Boiled Pudding.

Mix 1/2 pound of butter with 1/2 pound of powdered sugar to a cream.
Add the yolks of 6 eggs beaten, 1/2 cup of seeded raisins and some
chopped citron, a pinch of nutmeg and cinnamon. Mix in 1/2 pound of
sifted flour and 1/2 teaspoonful of baking-powder. Add the whites,
beaten to a stiff froth; put in a buttered pudding-mold, and let boil
until done. Serve with brandy sauce.


23.--German Stewed Brains.

Clean the brains. Heat 1 tablespoonful of drippings in a pan; add the
brains, 1 sliced onion, some parsley, salt and pepper. Let stew
fifteen minutes. Thicken the sauce with butter and flour; let boil up.
Serve hot with spinach and sprinkle all with chopped hard-boiled eggs.


24.--Scotch Cream Muffins.

Sift 1 pint of flour with 1 teaspoonful of baking-powder; beat three
yolks of eggs with a pinch of salt; add 1 pint of cream and 1
tablespoonful of melted butter. Stir in the flour; add the whites
beaten to a stiff froth. Beat all well together. Fill the muffin-rings
1/2 full and bake in a quick oven for twenty minutes.


25.--French Tart.

Make a rich pie-dough. Line a large pie-dish with the paste and bake.
Take 3 ounces of almonds and pound to a paste; add 3 tablespoonfuls of
pulverized sugar, 2 tablespoonfuls of melted butter, 1/2 teaspoonful
of cinnamon and the yolks of 2 eggs well beaten with 1 tablespoonful
of rum. Add the beaten whites; fill the pie and bake in a moderate
oven. Then make a glace. Mix 1 ounce of granulated sugar with 1
tablespoonful of cold water and let come to a boil. Put on the pie
when cool and serve.


26.--Polish Stewed Beans.

Break string-beans into pieces and let boil in salted water until
tender; then heat 1 tablespoonful of butter; stir in 1 tablespoonful
of flour until brown. Add the water in which the beans were cooked,
1/2 cup of vinegar, 1 tablespoonful of brown sugar, some cinnamon and
cloves to taste. Let sauce boil. Add the beans and simmer ten minutes.
Serve hot with a beef pot roast.


27.--Vienna Milk Rolls.

Sift 1-1/2 quarts of flour; add 1/2 teaspoonful of salt; work in a
large tablespoonful of butter; then stir in 1/2 cup of milk with a
piece of yeast dissolved in the milk and a teaspoonful of sugar. Beat
all up well with 1 pint of milk; let raise over night. Roll out an
inch thick; cut with a biscuit-cutter; rub with melted butter; lay in
a buttered baking-pan; let raise one hour; then bake in a hot oven
twenty minutes.


28.--Scotch Potato Stew.

Cut the potatoes into small dice pieces and fry in hot lard. Then fry
1 onion cut fine in hot butter, but do not brown; stir in some flour;
then add milk, salt, pepper and parsley. Let boil up once and add the
potatoes to the sauce. Let all get very hot and serve.


29.--Jewish Dumplings.

Soak 6 crackers in water; then press dry. Fry 1 chopped onion in
butter and pour over the crackers. Add 3 eggs and chopped parsley;
sprinkle with salt, pepper and nutmeg. Mix all with some cracker-meal
until you can form into balls and boil in salted water until done.
Serve hot with melted butter poured over them, and garnish
with parsley.


30.--Italian Soup.

Chop some cabbage and let fry in 2 tablespoonfuls of butter; add 1/2
cup of rice (dry) and 1 clove of garlic chopped with 1/2 small onion.
Let fry a few minutes; then add 2 quarts of soup-stock seasoned with
salt, white pepper and a little saffron to taste. Add 1/2 cup of
grated Parmesan cheese; let all cook until done. Serve with
toasted croutons.




_MAY._


1.--Turkish Puree.

Boil 1 cup of lentils with 1 bay-leaf, 2 sprigs of parsley, a pinch of
salt and pepper to taste; add some mace and cook until tender. Then
fry 1 chopped onion in 2 tablespoonfuls of olive-oil; add the lentils
and 1 cup of cooked rice and 1 tablespoonful of butter. Stir well
together and let get very hot. Put on a platter and pour over a highly
seasoned tomato-sauce and serve. Garnish with fried parsley.


2.--Jewish Kugel.

Soak 1/2 loaf of bread in water; then press it dry. Heat 1/2 cup of
butter and mix with the bread; add 2 chopped apples, 1/2 cup of
raisins, 1/2 cup of pounded almonds and the grated peel of a lemon.
Add the yolks of 4 eggs and the whites beaten to a stiff froth; mix
well together. Put in a buttered pudding-dish and pour over 1/2 cup of
melted butter; let bake in a moderate oven until brown. Serve hot.


3.--English Muffins.

Take 1 quart of warm milk, 1/2 cup of yeast, 1 teaspoonful of salt and
flour enough to make a stiff batter; let stand to raise until light.
Then add 1/2 cup of melted butter, 1 teaspoonful of soda dissolved in
a little water; add enough flour to make a very stiff batter and let
raise half an hour. Then fill well-greased muffin-rings half full with
the batter and bake in a quick oven until done. Serve with butter.


4.--Spanish Roast Veal.

Season a 6-pound veal-roast with salt and pepper and rub well with
butter; put in the dripping-pan with one large sliced onion, 1
bay-leaf, 2 sprigs of parsley and 2 of thyme and sage. Add 1/2
teaspoonful each of cloves, allspice and mace. Pour in 1 cup of hot
water and the juice of a lemon and dredge with flour; add a
tablespoonful of butter. Let bake until brown and tender. Baste often
with the sauce and serve.


5.--Madras Stewed Chicken.

Cut a spring chicken into pieces at the joints; season with salt and
pepper and fry in hot lard with some tender mutton chops. Fry 1 sliced
onion in hot butter with 2 ounces of rice, 1 teaspoonful of
curry-powder and 1 chopped apple; add to the chicken. Moisten with 1
quart of chicken broth, season to taste and let simmer until the
chicken and mutton are very tender; then add 1 pint of hot oysters and
the juice of 1/2 lemon. Let all get very hot and serve on a platter
with fried egg-plant.


6.--Irish Beef Rolls.

Chop some fat beef with 1 onion and 2 sprigs of parsley. Season with
salt, pepper, nutmeg and a little mace to taste and the grated rind of
1/2 lemon, 1 beaten egg and 1/2 cup of fine bread-crumbs. Mix all well
together and shape into rolls. Then heat some dripping in a saucepan;
lay in the rolls; cover and let simmer until brown. Serve hot with
the sauce.


7.--Norwegian Fruit Pudding.

Boil 1 pint of raspberries and 1 pint of red currants in 2 cups of
water until soft; add 3 cups of sugar, some cinnamon, 1 cup of pounded
almonds and 1 tablespoonful of chopped citron. Let cook and mash until
smooth; then thicken with a little cornstarch. Remove from the fire
and pour into a mold. When cold, serve with whipped cream.


8.--Spanish Puffs.

Put a large cupful of water in a saucepan; add 2 ounces of butter, 1/4
teaspoonful of salt, 1 tablespoonful of pulverized sugar. While
boiling, stir in sifted flour until stiff and smooth. Remove from the
stove and stir in the yolks of 4 eggs, one at a time, and the beaten
whites; then fry by the teaspoonful in boiling lard until browned.
Serve with a caramel sauce.


9.--Belgian Veal Scallop.

Chop cooked veal to a fine mince; butter a baking-dish and put
alternate layers of veal, rice and tomato-sauce until dish is full.
Cover over with fine bread-crumbs; pour over some melted butter and
let bake in the oven until brown. Serve with French peas.


10.--Parisian Chicken.

Clean and season 2 spring chickens. Put them in a saucepan with 3
tablespoonfuls of butter; cover and let simmer until brown. Add 1/2
can of mushrooms, chopped parsley, and 1 glass of wine; let all cook
until done. Put on a platter and pour over 1 cup of hot cream. Serve,
garnished with croutons.


11.--German Boiled Noodles.

Make a stiff noodle-dough; roll out very thin and cut into ribbons
half an inch wide. Let them dry and boil in salted water; drain in a
colander. Fry some sliced onions in butter until soft; add the
noodles. Stir and serve hot with stewed chicken.


12.--Dutch Baked Fish.

Clean and split a fish open down the back; remove the backbone;
sprinkle with salt and pepper; put in a baking-dish, flesh side up.
Put flakes of butter on top; sprinkle with a little flour; moisten
with cream. Bake in a hot oven until brown. Pour over a Hollandaise
sauce and serve hot.


13.--Vienna Cheese Torte.

Mix 1 cup of cottage cheese with 1 tablespoonful of cream, 1
tablespoonful of flour, 1 tablespoonful of butter, 3 tablespoonfuls of
sugar, the yolks of 3 eggs, and a pinch of salt and cinnamon. Mix all
together with the whites beaten stiff; then line muffin-rings with a
rich pastry-dough; fill with the cheese and bake in a moderate oven
until brown.


14.--Hungarian Fried Noodles.

Beat 3 eggs with 2 tablespoonfuls of water; add a pinch of salt and
enough flour to make a stiff dough work well. Then roll out as thin as
paper; fold the dough and cut into round pieces; fry in deep hot lard
to a golden brown. Serve hot with stewed chicken.


15.--Belgian Roast Lamb.

Season 4 pounds of lamb with salt, pepper and lemon-juice; put in the
dripping-pan with 2 small chopped onions, 1 bay-leaf, 2 sprigs of
parsley and thyme; then pour over 1/2 cup of butter and dredge with
flour. Add a cup of hot water and the juice of a lemon. Let bake in a
hot oven until done. Serve with French peas.


16.--Russian Salad.

Chop 1/2 pound of cold roast veal with 1/4 pound of smoked salmon, 3
sour pickles, 2 sour apples, 1 large onion, some beans and capers and
3 hard-boiled eggs chopped fine. Add some chopped nuts. Season and
pour over a mayonnaise dressing. Garnish with sliced beets and olives;
serve cold.


17.--French Rolls.

Prepare the dough as for bread. Work in 1/4 pound of butter and 1/4
pound of sugar. Add 4 beaten eggs; form into rolls; put in a
well-buttered baking-pan; let them raise half an hour. Brush the tops
with beaten egg and let bake until done.


18.--German Herring Salad.

Soak herrings over night in cold water; remove the milch; cut off the
head and skin and cut the herring into small pieces; add 2 apples, 2
pickles, 3 hard-boiled eggs, 1 onion, a few olives, all cut fine. Put
into bowl; mash the milch with a little mustard, 1 teaspoonful of
sugar, pepper and salt. Add 1/4 cupful of vinegar and mix all well
together. Garnish with sliced lemon, and serve with boiled potatoes.


19.--Belgian Fried Calf's Feet.

Clean and boil the calf's feet until tender; season with salt and
pepper. Remove the large bones from the feet; beat 2 eggs with salt
and pepper; dip the feet in the beaten eggs; then roll in fine
bread-crumbs and fry in deep hot lard until brown. Serve hot with
tomato-sauce.


20.--Italian Ice Cream.

Whip 1 quart of cream with 2 cupfuls of sugar until stiff. Put in the
freezer until half frozen; then add the juice and grated peel of 2
lemons, 2 tablespoonfuls of fine brandy, and a little pistache
coloring. Let freeze until hard and serve with cake.


21.--French Chocolate Biscuits.

Beat the yolks of 6 eggs with 10 ounces of powered sugar; add 1 ounce
of powdered French chocolate. Mix well with 4 ounces of flour and the
whites beaten stiff with a pinch of salt; add 1 tablespoonful of
vanilla extract. Bake on wafer sheets in small cakes to a light brown.


22.--India Canapes.

Cut slices of bread into delicate circles and toast in butter; then
take 1 ounce of chutney and 2 ounces of grated Parmesan cheese; spread
the toast with ham and the chutney and sprinkle with grated cheese.
Set in the oven a few minutes and serve hot, garnished with
fried parsley.


23.--Chicken a la Tartare.

Season and stew 2 spring chickens with 1 onion, some capers, parsley,
1 bay-leaf and 2 sprigs of thyme chopped fine until tender. Remove the
chickens; add 1 tablespoonful of minced pickles, 1 teaspoonful of made
mustard, 1 teaspoonful of tarragon and 1/2 cup of mayonnaise sauce.
Let boil up and pour over the chickens. Serve with boiled rice.


24.--Jewish Pudding.

Soak 6 matzoth crackers in water; press dry and mix with 1
tablespoonful of butter, a pinch of salt, the yolks of 5 eggs, a small
cup of sugar, some cinnamon, 1/2 cup of raisins and a little grated
lemon peel. Add the beaten whites and bake until brown. Serve with
wine sauce.


25.--German Potato Pancakes.

Peel 3 large potatoes and lay in salted water half an hour; then grate
the potatoes; add pepper, salt, 3 eggs and a large spoonful of flour.
Beat well together and fry in hot lard by the tablespoonful until
light brown. Serve hot with a pot roast.


26.--English Roast Veal.

Season a veal loin roast with salt and pepper and rub with butter. Put
in the dripping-pan with sliced onions, tomatoes and parsley and 2
tablespoonfuls of dripping. Let roast; baste often until tender. Serve
hot or cold, cut into thin slices.


27.--Russian Rice Pudding.

Mix cold boiled rice with the juice and rind of a lemon, 1 cup of
sugar and 1/2 glass of fine rum; then press into a mold. Let get very
cold and serve with cold cooked fruit.


28.--Scotch Pudding.

Take 2 quart of black cherries; remove the stones and mix with 1/2
pound of fine bread-crumbs, some chopped nuts, the beaten yolks of 4
eggs and 1/2 cup of sugar. Add the whites beaten stiff. Bake in a
well-buttered pudding-dish and serve cold.


29.--Italian Potato Balls.

Peel and boil potatoes in salted water until soft; drain, and mash
smooth. Take a pint of the mashed potatoes; mix with 2 tablespoonfuls
of melted butter and 1 egg; add a little flour, and form into balls.
Put them into a well-buttered baking-pan; sprinkle with grated
Parmesan cheese and bake in a quick oven to a golden brown. Serve with
stewed chicken.


30.--Belgian Veal Cutlets.

Season veal cutlets; dip in beaten egg and roll in fine bread-crumbs.
Fry in deep hot lard; keep hot. Chop a few onions with a clove of
garlic and fry in a tablespoonful of butter. Stir in 1 tablespoonful
of flour until brown; add a little water and the juice of a lemon,
salt, pepper and nutmeg to taste. Let boil well; then remove from the
fire; stir in the yolks of 2 eggs, and let get very hot; pour over the
chops. Serve with French peas.


31.--French Lemon Cookies.

Beat the yolks of 4 eggs; add 1 cup of butter and 3 cups of sugar
beaten. Add the whites beaten stiff and a teaspoonful of lemon
extract. Add enough flour with a teaspoonful of baking-powder to make
a stiff dough. Roll out thin; cut into small cookies and bake in a
quick oven to a light brown.




_JUNE._


1.--Italian Stuffed Tomatoes.

Cut tomatoes in halves; take out some of the pulp. Fry 1 large onion
in butter, add the tomato pulp, a piece of beef-marrow, 2 sprigs of
chopped parsley, salt and pepper. Remove from the fire; add a beaten
egg and mix with bread-crumbs and a pinch of nutmeg. Then fill the
tomatoes, sprinkle with buttered bread-crumbs and bake until done.
Serve on a platter with poached eggs. Garnish with croutons.


2.--English Salad.

Pick, wash and drain 2 heads of lettuce and break into pieces. Mix
with some watercress, shredded celery and a few leaves of mint. Put in
a salad bowl, sprinkle with salt, pepper, sugar and lemon-juice and
pour over a salad-dressing. Garnish with slices of hard-boiled eggs
and pickled beet-root.


3.--Scotch Stuffed Eggs.

Boil eggs until hard; remove the shells. Cut out the centres
lengthwise; then chop cooked chicken to a fine mince; add the yolk of
a raw egg and mix with cream. Season to taste with salt and pepper.
Fill the eggs and dip them in beaten eggs and fine bread-crumbs and
fry a light brown. Serve hot with cream sauce. Garnish with parsley.


4.--Oriental Vegetable Curry.

Peel and fry some small onions. Add 2 stalks of celery, cut into inch
pieces; sprinkle with salt, pepper and curry-powder; add a few
truffles and pour over all 1 cup of stock. Let stew until tender. Then
boil some potatoes; mash smooth with butter and season with curry
sauce. Place a border of mashed potatoes on a platter and put the stew
in the centre; serve hot. Garnish with fried parsley.


5.--Chinese Noodle Soup.

Boil a large hen in 3 quarts of water. Add a few slices of ham, 1
onion sliced, some sliced mushrooms, 2 stalks of celery cut fine, 2
tomatoes and Chinese chopped herbs. Let cook three hours and strain;
then boil up; add fine noodles and let cook ten minutes. Add chopped
parsley and serve at once.


6.--Hindu Eggs.

Slice some hard-boiled eggs and place in a well-buttered baking-dish.
Cover with well-beaten raw eggs; sprinkle with salt, pepper, cayenne
and curry-powder, a few bits of butter rolled in bread-crumbs and some
grated cheese. Let bake in a moderate oven until done.


7.--Portugal Veal Stew.

Heat 2 tablespoonfuls of olive-oil in a stew-pan; add 2 sliced onions,
a clove of garlic and a few capers. Let fry a few minutes. Stir in 1
tablespoonful of flour until brown; add 1/2 cup of stock; season with
salt, pepper, cinnamon, cloves and a pinch of saffron. Add 1 cup of
white wine; let boil; then add cooked veal sliced thin. Let cook ten
minutes in the sauce and serve very hot.


8.--Italian Coffee Cream.

Mix 1-1/2 cups of strong coffee with 1/2 cup of rich milk in a double
boiler; add 1/2 cup of sugar, 1 tablespoonful of gelatin and a pinch
of salt. Then stir in the yolks of 3 eggs beaten with 1/2 cup of sugar
until it thickens. Remove from the fire; add the whites beaten to a
froth and a teaspoonful of vanilla. Pack in a mold and freeze until
hard and serve with whipped cream.


9.--Scotch Rarebit.

Cut 1/2 pound of cheese in very small pieces and add 1 ounce of fresh
butter, 2 tablespoonfuls of fine bread-crumbs, 1 teaspoonful of
prepared mustard, salt and pepper and a pinch of cayenne to taste. Mix
well together to a smooth paste. Have ready some buttered toast; place
on a dish, spread with the mixture and set in the oven until melted.
Serve at once.


10.--Irish Ham Omelet.

Beat 6 yolks of eggs with a pinch of salt; add the whites beaten stiff
and mix with a tablespoonful of cream. Beat 2 ounces of butter in an
omelet pan; add the beaten eggs and shake the pan to spread evenly.
Have ready some finely minced ham. Spread on half of the omelet, fold
and serve at once on a hot dish.


11.--Jewish Stewed Tongue.

Boil a calf's tongue in salted water until tender; skin and slice
thin. Then heat 2 tablespoonfuls of butter; add 1 chopped onion; stir
in 1 tablespoonful of flour until brown; add 2 cups of the water in
which the tongue was cooked, 1/4 cup of seeded raisins, a few cloves,
1 bay-leaf, 1/4 cup of vinegar, and 1/2 teaspoonful of paprica. Let
all boil well; then add the sliced tongue. Let simmer ten minutes.
Serve hot or cold.


12.--French Prune Souffle.

Cook 1/2 pound of prunes until soft; remove the stones and cut the
prunes into small pieces. Mix with some chopped nuts and the yolks of
3 eggs well beaten with 3 tablespoonfuls of pulverized sugar. Add 1
teaspoonful of vanilla and the whites of the eggs beaten stiff. Put in
a pudding-dish and bake in a moderate oven for ten minutes and serve.


13.--Italian Cooked Eggs.

Take 6 hard-boiled eggs and cut lengthwise. Put in a pan with 12
anchovies, some onion juice and 1 tablespoonful of finely chopped
parsley. Season with salt, white pepper and a little nutmeg, grated.
Then pour over all 1/2 pint of sour cream. Let boil up once and serve
hot with croutons.


14.--Spanish Broiled Steak.

Season a porter-house steak with salt and pepper and rub with butter.
Place on a hot gridiron and let broil on a quick fire on both sides.
Make this sauce: Chop 1 onion and brown in 1 tablespoonful of butter;
add 1/2 cup of stock and 1/2 cup of claret; let boil well. Season and
thicken the sauce with a little flour and some chopped parsley. Let
boil up and serve at once with the steak.


15.--Liver a la Bourgogne.

Season a calf's liver with salt and pepper; put a few slices of bacon
in a saucepan; let get very hot. Add the liver, 1 onion, 1 carrot, 2
bay-leaves and 2 sprigs of thyme minced fine; cover and let brown a
few minutes. Then add 1 glass of sherry wine, salt and pepper and
sprinkle with flour. Let simmer ten minutes. Serve hot with potatoes.


16.--Messina Macaroni.

Boil some macaroni in salted water until tender. Then fry 1 onion and
2 cloves of garlic chopped in olive-oil. Add 1 cup of tomato-sauce,
salt and pepper to taste. Then add the macaroni, and let fry
altogether. Serve hot with baked chicken.


17.--Dutch Prune Pudding.

Boil prunes until very soft; remove the stones. Mash well; add the
yolks of 4 beaten eggs, 3 tablespoonfuls of sugar, 1 cup of
bread-crumbs, 1 teaspoonful of vanilla, 1/2 cup of chopped nuts, and
the whites of the eggs beaten stiff. Put in a well-buttered
pudding-dish and bake in a moderate oven until done. Serve cold.


18.--Irish Beef Stew.

Season a piece of fat beef; put in a stew-pan with some hot water. Let
cook slowly a half hour. Then add 3 potatoes, cut in dice pieces, and
1 onion, sliced. Let cook slowly until tender. Add 1/2 cup of corn and
1 cup of tomatoes; season with salt and pepper. Let all cook until
done. Serve hot.


19.--English Creamed Asparagus.

Cut tough ends from the asparagus; scrape and boil in salted water
until tender. Make a cream sauce. When done, stir in the yolk of an
egg; season with a little white pepper. The sauce must be rather thick
and poured hot over the asparagus. Serve with veal chops.


20.--French Float.

Line a glass dish with stale sponge-cake. Sprinkle with wine. Make a
boiled custard. Use 4 yolks of eggs and flavor with rose-water. Beat
the whites with pulverized sugar and flavor to taste. Pour the custard
over the cake and place the stiffly beaten whites on top. Put on the
ice and serve very cold.


21.--Russian Pot Roast.

Season a round of beef with salt, pepper, cloves and nutmeg. Put in a
saucepan on hot dripping. Peel 6 small onions and slice 2 carrots and
2 cloves of garlic. Add to the meat with 1 herb bouquet. Cover with 1
cup of hot water and let cook slowly until tender; then add 1/2 can of
chopped mushrooms, 1 glass of claret, salt and pepper to taste. Serve
hot on a border of mashed potatoes.


22.--Spanish Salad.

Take 1/2 pound of chopped chicken, 1/4 pound of almonds, 1 red pepper,
1 Spanish onion and 1 head of chicory chopped fine. Mix in a salad
bowl with 1/4 teaspoonful of salt, 1 teaspoonful of curry-powder, 2
tablespoonfuls of tarragon vinegar, 4 tablespoonfuls of olive-oil.
Garnish with sliced beets and bananas.


23.--Scotch Baked Potatoes.

Peel and slice 6 raw potatoes very thin; then beat 1 egg with 1
tablespoonful of butter. Put the potatoes into a shallow baking-dish,
sprinkle well with salt and pepper. Add enough milk to cover the
potatoes; add the beaten egg. Sprinkle 1/2 cup of grated cheese over
all and let bake until done.


24.--German Apple Cake.

Make a biscuit dough; roll out very thin and put on a well-buttered
cake-pan. Have ready some apples. Cut in quarters; lay closely on the
cake; sprinkle thick with brown sugar; add some cinnamon and a handful
of currants. Pour some fresh melted butter over the cake; set in the
oven to bake until done. Serve with coffee.


25.--English Ham Sandwiches.

Cut thin slices of fresh bread. Chop ham with the yolks of 2
hard-boiled eggs; add some made mustard and fresh butter and a dash of
pepper. Mix all well and spread between the slices of bread. Serve on
a folded napkin and garnish with sprigs of parsley.


26.--Swiss Peach Custard.

Line a well-buttered pudding-dish with slices of sponge-cake and cover
with peach compote. Make an egg custard and cover with the custard;
set in the oven to bake. Beat the whites of 2 eggs with a little
lemon-juice and pulverized sugar spread on the top and let brown.
Serve cold.


27.--French Veal Hash.

Cut veal round-steak into small pieces. Then fry some chopped bacon, 1
onion and 2 cloves of garlic chopped; add the meat; stir well and let
all fry a few minutes. Add 1 cup of boiling water and let cook slowly
with some parsley and thyme, salt, pepper, until tender. Add a
tablespoonful of vinegar. Let boil up; remove from the fire and stir
in the yolks of 2 eggs well beaten. Serve hot with toast.


28.--Vienna Potato Salad.

Slice boiled potatoes thin; chop some onion very fine; slice 2
hard-boiled eggs and mix. Sprinkle all with salt and pepper. Then heat
some vinegar. Add a teaspoonful of made mustard and stir with the
beaten yolk of an egg. Mix all together with 1 tablespoonful of hot
butter and chopped parsley. Serve with cold meats.


29.--French Baked Omelet.

Beat 4 yolks of eggs; add 6 soda crackers crushed fine, salt, pepper,
1 teaspoonful of grated onion, 1 tablespoonful of butter and 1 cup of
milk. Beat up well; add the whites beaten stiff; put into a
well-buttered baking-dish and let bake in a hot oven. Serve at once.


30.--Italian Batter Cakes.

Beat 3 yolks of eggs with 1 cup of milk, a Salt-spoonful of salt, 1
tablespoonful of olive-oil and 1 tablespoonful of sugar. Mix with 1/2
cup of flour and the beaten whites of the eggs. Fry until light brown.
Serve with cooked fruit.




_JULY._


1.--Portugal Iced Pudding.

Mix 1 quart of vanilla ice-cream with 1 gill of wine, 1/4 pound of
Malaga grapes, 2 ounces of candied orange peel, chopped fine, and 1
pint of whipped cream. Then place in the freezer to harden and serve.


2.--English Chicken Salad.

Mix 1 cup of cold chicken cut fine with 1 cup of chopped celery, 1 cup
of cooked chestnuts chopped and 2 green peppers cut fine. Season with
salt and pepper. Put on crisp lettuce leaves in the salad bowl; cover
with a mayonnaise dressing. Serve cold.


3.--Turkish Stewed Lamb.

Season a quarter of a young lamb and cut into pieces. Lay in a large
stew-pan and cover with hot water. Add 1 sliced onion, 2 sliced green
peppers and 2 tomatoes, 1 red pepper and 2 sprigs of parsley. Let stew
slowly until tender. Then fry thin slices of egg-plant and add to the
stew. Serve hot.


4.--Irish Apple Pudding.

Pare and slice apples and lay them in a buttered pie-dish. Sprinkle
with brown sugar; add the juice and rind of 1/2 of a lemon, a pinch of
cinnamon and cloves. Then cover with a rich pie-paste and let bake
until done.


5.--Indian Rice.

Boil 1 cup of rice in chicken broth; add a pinch of curry-powder and
season to taste with salt and pepper. Boil 1/2 teaspoonful of saffron
in 1 cup of the stock; then let all cook slowly until the broth is
entirely absorbed by the rice. Serve very hot.


6.--Hungarian Chicken Soup.

Boil a large chicken in 3 quarts of water; season with salt, sage and
pepper; add 1 onion chopped and cook until tender. Remove the chicken
and chop it fine; then add to the soup with the yolks of 3 well-beaten
eggs; let all get very hot. Sprinkle with chopped parsley and serve
at once.


7.--Yorkshire Pudding.

Beat 3 eggs with a pinch of salt; add 1 pint of milk and 2/3 of a cup
of flour. Stir until smooth. Then pour into a well-greased pan and
bake until done. Serve with English roast-beef, and pour over
the gravy.


8.--Portugal Salad.

Slice 2 cucumbers, 2 tomatoes, 1 onion and two green peppers. Then
sprinkle with 1 chopped clove of garlic, salt and pepper and cover
with some thin slices of bread. Pour over all a cup of vinegar and 1/4
cup of olive-oil and serve.


9.--English Chocolate Pudding.

Soak 6 ounces of bread-crumbs in milk and press dry; add 2 ounces of
butter mixed with 3 ounces of sugar and 3 ounces of chocolate; add the
yolks of 6 eggs well beaten, and flavor with a teaspoonful of vanilla;
add the whites beaten to a stiff froth. Bake in a quick oven and
serve at once.


10.--Spanish Canapes.

Prepare circular pieces of buttered toast. Then mix 1 cup of chopped
fish with 3 sweet pickles minced fine, and 2 tablespoonfuls of Madras
chutney; moisten with 2 tablespoonfuls of Hollandaise sauce. Spread
this mixture over 8 pieces of toast; sprinkle with 3 tablespoonfuls of
grated Parmesan cheese. Let bake for five minutes and serve.


11.--French Strawberry Pudding.

Dip enough macaroons in wine to line the pudding-dish; cover with
sweetened strawberries. Beat the yolks of 4 eggs with sugar and flavor
with vanilla; pour over the strawberries; put in the oven to bake.
Beat the whites to a stiff froth with some pulverized sugar; put on
top of the pudding and let brown. Serve cold.


12.--Veal Croquettes a la Reine.

Chop cold veal. Mix with some sweetbread and mushrooms chopped. Season
with salt, pepper and lemon-juice. Add a sprig of parsley and a little
onion chopped fine. Mix with a beaten egg and bread-crumbs; sprinkle
with nutmeg. Form into croquettes. Dip in beaten egg and fine
bread-crumbs and fry in deep hot lard. Serve hot with a cream sauce.


13.--German Cheese Pie.

Line a pie-plate with a rich pie-dough. Mix 1 cup of cottage cheese
with 1 tablespoonful of butter, 1/4 cup of sugar, 2 eggs, a pinch of
salt and a few currants. Mix well. Fill the pie. Sprinkle with sugar
and cinnamon and bake until light brown. Serve hot or cold.


14.--Italian Veal Pates.

Chop cooked veal with some onion, parsley, thyme and 1 clove of
garlic; season with salt, pepper and nutmeg. Add some chopped ham,
lemon-juice and 2 eggs. Mix with bread-crumbs and melted butter. Fill
into small pate shells; rub with butter and beaten egg. Place a paper
over the top and let bake in a moderate oven. Serve with tomato-sauce.


15.--Hungarian Noodle Pudding.

Boil finely cut noodles in salted water drain and mix with the yolks
of 5 eggs, 1/2 cup of raisins, sugar, cinnamon, and grated lemon peel
to taste. Add the beaten whites. Line the pudding-dish with a rich
pie-paste. Fill with the noodles and pour over some melted butter.
Bake until brown. Serve hot with lemon sauce.


16.--Polish Stewed Chicken.

Clean a fat hen and cut into pieces at the joints; season and let stew
with 2 sliced onions, 2 carrots and 1 potato, cut into dice pieces.
When nearly done, add 1 cup of sauerkraut, 2 tablespoonfuls of sorrel
and 1/2 cup of wine. Let cook until tender and serve on a platter with
cooked rice.


17.--Madras Curried Apples.

Peel and core 4 sour apples and cut into rings; then sprinkle with
curry-powder and let fry until tender. Add a few thinly cut shallots.
Cover and let simmer until done. Serve on a platter with boiled rice
and pour over a curry sauce.


18.--Irish Batter Cakes.

Beat the yolks of 4 eggs; add a pinch of salt, 1 tablespoonful of
melted butter, 1 small cup of milk and sifted flour enough to make a
smooth batter. Beat well. Add the whites of eggs, beaten stiff and let
fry a golden color; then spread with jam and serve hot.


19.--Spanish Baked Eggs.

Poach eggs as soft as possible. Butter a baking-dish; add a layer of
bread-crumbs and grated cheese. Place the eggs on the crumbs; sprinkle
with salt, pepper, grated cheese and chopped parsley. Cover with
bread-crumbs and pour over some cream sauce. Let bake in a hot oven
until brown on top. Serve with toast.


20.--Scotch Stewed Onions.

Boil 1 dozen small onions and 4 leeks in salted water until tender;
drain. Heat 2 tablespoonfuls of butter. Stir in 1 tablespoonful of
flour until smooth but not brown; then add 1/2 pint of rich milk;
season highly with pepper, and salt to taste. Add the onions; let boil
up and serve.


21.--German Baked Cabbage.

Take a large cabbage; remove the outer leaves and the inside, leaving
a frame. Chop all the cabbage from the inside and fry in hot grease
with 1 sliced onion. Remove from the fire. Mix well with bread-crumbs
and 1/2 cup of chopped ham, 2 eggs, salt, black pepper and cayenne.
Refill the cabbage; put on the outside leaves; cover the top with
leaves. Put in a baking-pan; sprinkle with bits of butter and pour in
1/2 cup of water. Let bake until brown. Serve hot.


22.--Dutch Veal Stew.

Season 3 pounds of veal with salt, pepper and lemon-juice. Put a few
slices of bacon in a stew-pan; when hot, add the veal. Cover and let
brown a few minutes; then add 2 carrots and 1 onion sliced thin, some
thyme and mace; pour over 1 cup of hot water. Cover and let cook
slowly until tender. Thicken with flour mixed with 1/2 cup of milk.
Add chopped parsley; season to taste and serve with baked potatoes.


23.--French Baked Apple Dumplings.

Peel and core apples; sprinkle well with sugar. Then mix some cold
boiled rice with 1 egg, a pinch of salt, sugar and cinnamon, flour
enough to make a dough. Cover the apples with the dough; put in a
well-buttered baking-dish with 2 tablespoonfuls of butter and bake to
a delicate brown. Serve with whipped cream.


24.--Bavarian Fried Brains.

Clean and boil the brains in salted water; add 1 onion sliced; let
cook ten minutes. Remove the brains and mash up well with 1
tablespoonful of butter, some bread-crumbs and parsley chopped, salt
and pepper to taste; add 2 eggs. Mix together and fry in deep hot lard
by the tablespoonful until brown. Serve with tomato-sauce.


25.--Polish Bread Pudding.

Soak 1 pint of bread in a quart of milk; add the yolks of 4 eggs, 1
cup of sugar, 2 tablespoonfuls of melted butter, 1/2 cup of raisins,
1/2 cup of currants, the juice of 1/2 lemon. Mix well and bake until
brown; then beat the whites to a stiff froth with 3 tablespoonfuls of
pulverized sugar. Spread the pudding with jelly and cover with the
beaten whites; set in the oven to brown.


26.--Vienna Cherry Cake.

Make a rich biscuit dough; roll out; then put on a well-buttered
baking-tin. Stone black cherries. Sprinkle the dough with flour and
cover with the cherries. Sprinkle with sugar and let bake until done.
Then cover with a sweetened egg custard and bake until brown.
Serve cold.


27.--Belgian Poached Eggs.

Cut thin round slices of bread and toast them. Spread with chopped
anchovies and chopped ham. Cover the top with whipped whites of eggs
and place a raw yoke on each slice of bread. Set in the oven to bake
long enough to heat the egg, and serve at once.


28.--Bavarian Apple Pie.

Line a deep pie-dish with rich pie-paste. Let bake and fill with
chopped apples, raisins and chopped nuts, sugar and a pinch of
cinnamon and nutmeg. Then cover with cake-crumbs and let bake until
done. Beat 3 whites of eggs with pulverized sugar; flavor with lemon
and spread over the pudding. Set in the oven a few minutes to brown
on top.


29.--Russian Fried Sweetbreads.

Clean and season the sweetbreads with salt and pepper and sprinkle
with lemon-juice and chopped parsley. Roll in fine bread-crumbs and
fry in hot lard. Fry some eggs and put on a platter with the
sweetbreads and serve with tomato-sauce.


30.--Polish Apple Dumpling.

Peel and core the apples and fill the space with currants. Sprinkle

Back to Full Books