10,000 Dreams Interpreted [Or. . ."What's In A Dream"] [Or. . .Dreams, Their Scientific and Practical Interpretations]

_Gems_.[80]

To dream of gems, foretells a happy fate both in love and business affairs.


[80] See Jewelry.

_Genealogical Tree_.

To dream of your genealogical tree, denotes you will be much burdened
with family cares, or will find pleasure in other domains than your own.
To see others studying it, foretells that you will be forced to yield
your rights to others.  If any of the branches are missing, you will ignore
some of your friends because of their straightened circumstances.

_Geography_.[81]

To dream of studying geography, denotes that you will travel much
and visit places of renown.


[81] See Atlas.

_Ghost_.[82]

To dream of the ghost of either one of your parents, denotes that
you are exposed to danger, and you should be careful in forming
partnerships with strangers.

To see the ghost of a dead friend, foretells that you will make a long
journey with an unpleasant companion, and suffer disappointments.

For a ghost to speak to you, you will be decoyed into the hands of enemies.
For a woman, this is a prognostication of widowhood and deception.

To see an angel or a ghost appear in the sky, denotes the loss
of kindred and misfortunes.

To see a female ghost on your right in the sky and a male on your left,
both of pleasing countenance, signifies a quick rise from obscurity to fame,
but the honor and position will be filled only for a short space, as death
will be a visitor and will bear you off.

To see a female ghost in long, clinging robes floating calmly
through the sky, indicates that you will make progression
in scientific studies and acquire wealth almost miraculously,
but there will be an under note of sadness in your life.

To dream that you see the ghost of a living relative or friend,
denotes that you are in danger of some friend's malice, and you are
warned to carefully keep your affairs under personal supervision.
If the ghost appears to be haggard, it may be the intimation
of the early death of that friend.


[82] See Death, Dead.

_Giant_.

To dream of a giant appearing suddenly before you, denotes that there
will be a great struggle between you and your opponents.  If the giant
succeeds in stopping your journey, you will be overcome by your enemy.
If he runs from you, prosperity and good health will be yours.

_Gift_.

To dream that you receive gifts from any one, denotes that you
will not be behind in your payments, and be unusually fortunate
in speculations or love matters.

To send a gift, signifies displeasure will be shown you,
and ill luck will surround your efforts.

For a young woman to dream that her lover sends her rich and beautiful gifts,
denotes that she will make a wealthy and congenial marriage.

_Gig_.[83]

To run a gig in your dream, you will have to forego a pleasant journey
to entertain unwelcome visitors.  Sickness also threatens you.


[83] See Cart.

_Girdle_.

To dream of wearing a girdle, and it presses you, denotes that you
will be influenced by designing people.

To see others wearing velvet, or jeweled girdles, foretells that you
will strive for wealth more than honor.

For a woman to receive one, signifies that honors will be conferred upon her.

_Girls_.

To dream of seeing a well, bright-looking girl, foretells pleasing
prospects and domestic joys.  If she is thin and pale,
it denotes that you will have an invalid in your family,
and much unpleasantness.

For a man to dream that he is a girl, he will be weak-minded,
or become an actor and play female parts.

_Glass_.

To dream that you are looking through glass, denotes that bitter
disappointments will cloud your brightest hopes.

To see your image in a mirror, foretells unfaithfulness and neglect
in marriage, and fruitless speculations.

To see another face with your own in a mirror indicates that you
are leading a double life.  You will deceive your friends.

To break a mirror, portends an early and accidental death.

To break glass dishes, or windows, foretells the unfavorable
termination to enterprises.

To receive cut glass, denotes that you will be admired for your
brilliancy and talent.

To make presents of cut glass ornaments, signifies that you will fail
in your undertakings.

For a woman to see her lover in a mirror, denotes that she will have cause
to institute a breach of promise suit.

For a married woman to see her husband in a mirror, is a warning that she
will have cause to feel anxiety for her happiness and honor.

To look clearly through a glass window, you will have employment,
but will have to work subordinately.  If the glass is clouded,
you will be unfortunately situated.

If a woman sees men, other than husband or lover, in a looking glass,
she will be discovered in some indiscreet affair which will be humiliating
to her and a source of worry to her relations.

For a man to dream of seeing strange women in a mirror,
he will ruin his health and business by foolish attachments.

_Glass-blower_.

To dream that you see glass-blowers at their work, denotes you will
contemplate change in your business, which will appear for the better,
but you will make it at a loss to yourself.

_Glass House_.

To see a glass house, foretells you are likely to be injured by listening
to flattery.  For a young woman to dream that she is living in a glass house,
her coming trouble and threatened loss of reputation is emphasized.

_Gleaning_.

To see gleaners at work at harvest time, denotes prosperous
business, and, to the farmer, a bountiful yield of crops.
If you are working with the gleaners, you will come into
an estate, after some trouble in establishing rights.
For a woman, this dream foretells marriage with a stranger.

_Gloomy_.[84]

To be surrounded by many gloomy situations in your dream,
warns you of rapidly approaching unpleasantness and loss.


[84] See Despair.

_Gloves_.

To dream of wearing new gloves, denotes that you will be cautious
and economical in your dealings with others, but not mercenary.
You will have law suits, or business troubles, but will settle them
satisfactorily to yourself.

If you wear old or ragged gloves, you will be betrayed and suffer loss.

If you dream that you lose your gloves, you will be deserted and earn
your own means of livelihood.

To find a pair of gloves, denotes a marriage or new love affair.

For a man to fasten a lady's glove, he has, or will have,
a woman on his hands who threatens him with exposure.

If you pull your glove off, you will meet with poor success
in business or love.

_Goat_.

To dream of goats wandering around a farm, is significant of seasonable
weather and a fine yield of crops To see them otherwise, denotes cautious
dealings and a steady increase of wealth.

If a billy goat butts you, beware that enemies do not get possession
of your secrets or business plans.

For a woman to dream of riding a billy goat, denotes that she will be held
in disrepute because of her coarse and ill-bred conduct.

If a woman dreams that she drinks goat's milk, she will marry
for money and will not be disappointed.

_Goblet_.

If you dream that you drink water from a silver goblet,
you will meet unfavorable business results in the near future.

To see goblets of ancient design, you will receive favors
and benefits from strangers.

For a woman to give a man a glass goblet full of water,
denotes illicit pleasures.

_God_.

If you dream of seeing God, you will be domineered over by a tyrannical
woman masquerading under the cloak of Christianity.  No good accrues
from this dream.

If God speaks to you, beware that you do not fall into condemnation.
Business of all sorts will take an unfavorable turn.  It is the forerunner
of the weakening of health and may mean early dissolution.

If you dream of worshiping God, you will have cause to repent
of an error of your own making.  Look well to observing the ten
commandments after this dream.

To dream that God confers distinct favors upon you, you will become
the favorite of a cautious and prominent person who will use his
position to advance yours.

To dream that God sends his spirit upon you, great changes in your
beliefs will take place.  Views concerning dogmatic Christianity
should broaden after this dream, or you may be severely chastised
for some indiscreet action which has brought shame upon you.
God speaks oftener to those who transgress than those who do not.
It is the genius of spiritual law or economy to reinstate the prodigal
child by signs and visions.  Elijah, Jonah, David, and Paul were
brought to the altar of repentence through the vigilant energy
of the hidden forces within.

_Goggles_.

To dream of goggles, is a warning of disreputable companions
who will wheedle you into lending your money foolishly.

For a young woman to dream of goggles, means that she will listen
to persuasion which will mar her fortune.

_Gold_.

If you handle gold in your dream, you will be unusually successful in
all enterprises.  For a woman to dream that she receives presents of gold,
either money or ornaments, she will marry a wealthy but mercenary man.

To find gold, indicates that your superior abilities will place
you easily ahead in the race for honors and wealth.

If you lose gold, you will miss the grandest opportunity of your
life through negligence.

To dream of finding a gold vein, denotes that some uneasy honor
will be thrust upon you.

If you dream that you contemplate working a gold mine, you will endeavor
to usurp the rights of others, and should beware of domestic scandals.

_Goldfish_.

To dream of goldfish, is a prognostic of many successful
and pleasant adventures.  For a young woman, this dream
is indicative of a wealthy union with a pleasing man.
If the fish are sick or dead, heavy disappointments will
fall upon her.

_Gold Leaves_.

To dream of gold leaves, signifies a flattering future is before you.

_Golf_.

To be playing golf or watching the game, denotes that
pleasant and successive wishing will be indulged in by you.
To see any unpleasantness connected with golf, you will be
humiliated by some thoughtless person.

_Gong_.

To hear the sound of a gong while dreaming, denotes false alarm of illness,
or loss will vex you excessively.

_Gooseberries_.

To dream of gathering gooseberries, is a sign of happiness after trouble,
and a favorable indication of brighter prospects in one's business affairs.

If you are eating green gooseberries, you will make a mistake in your course
to pleasure, and be precipitated into the vertex of sensationalism.
Bad results are sure to follow the tasting of green gooseberries.

To see gooseberries in a dream, foretells you will escape some dreaded work.
For a young woman to eat them, foretells she will be slightly disappointed
in her expectations.

_Gossip_.

To dream of being interested in common gossip, you will undergo some
humiliating trouble caused by overconfidence in transient friendships.

If you are the object of gossip, you may expect some pleasurable surprise.

_Gout_.

If you dream of having the gout, you will be sure to be exasperated
beyond endurance by the silly conduct of some relative, and suffer
small financial loss through the same person.

_Gown_.[85]

If you dream that you are in your nightgown, you will
be afflicted with a slight illness.  If you see others
thus clad, you will have unpleasant news of absent friends.
Business will receive a back set.

If a lover sees his sweetheart in her night gown, he will be superseded.


[85] See Cloths.

_Grain_.

Grain is a most fortunate dream, betokening wealth and happiness.
For a young woman, it is a dream of fortune.  She will meet wealthy
and adoring companions.

_Grammar_.

To dream that you are studying grammar, denotes you are soon to make a wise
choice in momentous opportunities.

_Gramophone_.

To dream of hearing the gramophone, foretells the advent of some new and
pleasing comrade who will lend himself willingly to advance your enjoyment.
If it is broken, some fateful occurrence will thwart and defeat delights
that you hold in anticipation.

_Grandparents_.

To dreaam{sic} of meeting your grandparents and conversing with them,
you will meet with difficulties that will be hard to surmount,
but by following good advice you will overcome many barriers.

_Grapes_.

To eat grapes in your dream, you will be hardened with many cares;
but if you only see them hanging in profuseness among the leaves, you will
soon attain to eminent positions and will be able to impart happiness
to others.  For a young woman, this dream is one of bright promise.
She will have her most ardent wish gratified.

To dream of riding on horseback and passing musca-dine bushes
and gathering and eating some of its fruit, denotes profitable
employment and the realization of great desires.  If there arises
in your mind a question of the poisonous quality of the fruit
you are eating, there will come doubts and fears of success,
but they will gradually cease to worry you.

_Grass_.

This is a very propitious dream indeed.  It gives promise of a happy
and well advanced life to the tradesman, rapid accumulation of wealth,
fame to literary and artistic people, and a safe voyage through
the turbulent sea of love is promised to all lovers.

To see a rugged mountain beyond the green expanse of grass,
is momentous of remote trouble.

If in passing through green grass, you pass withered places,
it denotes your sickness or embarrassments in business.

To be a perfect dream, the grass must be clear of obstruction or blemishes.
If you dream of withered grass, the reverse is predicted.

_Grasshopper_.

To dream of seeing grasshoppers on green vegetables, denotes that enemies
threaten your best interests.  If on withered grasses, ill health.
Disappointing business will be experienced.

If you see grasshoppers between you and the sun, it denotes that you
will have a vexatious problem in your immediate business life
to settle, but using caution it will adjust itself in your favor.
To call peoples' attention to the grasshoppers, shows that you
are not discreet in dispatching your private business.

_Grave_.

To dream that you see a newly made grave, you will have to suffer
for the wrongdoings of others.

If you visit a newly made grave, dangers of a serious nature is hanging
over you.  Grave is an unfortunate dream.  Ill luck in business transactions
will follow, also sickness is threatened.

To dream of walking on graves, predicts an early death or
an unfortunate marriage.

If you look into an empty grave, it denotes disappointment
and loss of friends.

If you see a person in a grave with the earth covering him, except the head,
some distressing situation will take hold of that person and loss of property
is indicated to the dreamer.

To see your own grave, foretells that enemies are warily seeking to engulf
you in disaster, and if you fail to be watchful they will succeed.

To dream of digging a grave, denotes some uneasiness
over some undertaking, as enemies will seek to thwart you,
but if you finish the grave you will overcome opposition.
If the sun is shining, good will come out of seeming embarrassments.

If you return for a corpse, to bury it, and it has disappeared,
trouble will come to you from obscure quarters.

For a woman to dream that night overtakes her in a graveyard, and she
can find no place to sleep but in an open grave, foreshows she will
have much sorrow and disappointment through death or false friends.
She may lose in love, and many things seek to work her harm.

To see a graveyard barren, except on top of the graves, signifies much
sorrow and despondency for a time, but greater benefits and pleasure
await you if you properly shoulder your burden.

To see your own corpse in a grave, foreshadows hopeless
and despairing oppression.

_Gravel_.

To dream of gravel, denotes unfruitful schemes and enterprises.

If you see gravel mixed with dirt, it foretells you will unfortunately
speculate and lose good property.

_Gravy_.

To dream of eating gravy, portends failing health and disappointing business.

_Grease_.

To dream you are in grease, is significant of travels being enjoyed
with disagreeable but polished strangers.

_Greek_.

To dream of reading Greek, denotes that your ideas will be
discussed and finally accepted and put in practical use.
To fail to read it, denotes that technical difficulties are
in your way.

_Greyhound_.

A greyhound is a fortunate object to see in your dream.
If it is following a young girl, you will be surprised with a
legacy from unknown people.  If a greyhound is owned by you,
it signifies friends where enemies were expected.

_Grindstone_.

For a person to dream of turning a grindstone, his dream is prophetic
of a life of energy and well directed efforts bringing handsome competency.

If you are sharpening tools, you will be blessed with a worthy helpmate.

To deal in grindstones, is significant of small but honest gain.

_Groans_.

If you hear groans in your dream, decide quickly on your course,
for enemies are undermining your business.  If you are groaning with fear,
you will be pleasantly surprised at the turn for better in your affairs,
and you may look for pleasant visiting among friends.

_Groceries_.

To dream of general groceries, if they are fresh and clean,
is a sign of ease and comfort.

_Grotto_.

To see a grotto in your dreams, is a sign of incomplete and
inconstant friendships.  Change from comfortable and simple
plenty will make showy poverty unbearable.

_Guardian_.

To dream of a guardian, denotes you will be treated with consideration
by your friends.  For a young woman to dream that she is being unkindly
dealt with by her guardian, foretells that she will have loss and trouble
in the future.

_Guitar_.

To dream that you have a guitar, or is playing one in a dream,
signifies a merry gathering and serious love making.
For a young woman to think it is unstrung or broken,
foretells that disappointments in love are sure to overtake her.

Upon hearing the weird music of a guitar, the dreamer
should fortify herself against flattery and soft persuasion,
for she is in danger of being tempted by a fascinating evil.
If the dreamer be a man, he will be courted, and will be likely
to lose his judgment under the wiles of seductive women.

If you play on a guitar, your family affairs will be harmonious.

_Gulls_.

To dream of gulls, is a prophecy of peaceful dealings
with ungenerous persons.  Seeing dead gulls, means wide
separation for friends.

_Gun_.

This is a dream of distress.  Hearing the sound of a gun, denotes loss
of employment, and bad management to proprietors of establishments.

If you shoot a person with a gun, you will fall into dishonor.

If you are shot, you will be annoyed by evil persons, and perhaps
suffer an acute illness.

For a woman to dream of shooting, forecasts for her a quarreling
and disagreeable reputation connected with sensations.
For a married woman, unhappiness through other women.

_Gutter_.

To dream of a gutter, is a sign of degradation.  You will be the cause
of unhappiness to others.

To find articles of value in a gutter, your right to certain property
will be questioned.

_Gymnast_.

To dream of a gymnast, denotes you will have misfortune
in speculation or trade.

_Gypsy_.

If you dream of visiting a gypsy camp, you will have an offer of importance
and will investigate the standing of the parties to your disadvantage.

For a woman to have a gypsy tell her fortune, is an omen
of a speedy and unwise marriage.  If she is already married,
she will be unduly jealous of her husband.

For a man to hold any conversation with a gypsy, he will be likely
to lose valuable property.

To dream of trading with a gypsy, you will lose money in speculation.
This dream denotes that material pleasures are the biggest items
in your life.



H.

``_And being warned of God in a dream that they should not return
to Herod, they departed into their own country another way_.''--
Matthew ii, 12.

_Haggard_.

To see a haggard face in your dreams, denotes misfortune and defeat
in love matters.

To see your own face haggard and distressed, denotes trouble
over female affairs, which may render you unable to meet business
engagements in a healthy manner.

_Hail_.

If you dream of being in a hail storm, you will meet poor success
in any undertaking.

If you watch hail-stones fall through sunshine and rain, you will be
harassed by cares for a time, but fortune will soon smile upon you.
For a young woman, this dream indicates love after many slights.

To hear hail beating the house, indicates distressing situations.

_Hair_.

If a woman dreams that she has beautiful hair and combs it,
she will be careless in her personal affairs, and will lose
advancement by neglecting mental application.

For a man to dream that he is thinning his hair, foreshadows that he will
become poor by his generosity, and suffer illness through mental worry.

To see your hair turning gray, foretells death and contagion
in the family of some relative or some friend.

To see yourself covered with hair, omens indulgence in vices to such
an extent as will debar you from the society of refined people.
If a woman, she will resolve herself into a world of her own,
claiming the right to act for her own pleasure regardless
of moral codes

If a man dreams that he has black, curling hair, he will deceive
people through his pleasing address.  He will very likely deceive
the women who trust him.  If a woman's hair seems black and curly,
she will be threatened with seduction.

If you dream of seeing a woman with golden hair, you will prove
a fearless lover and be woman's true friend.

To dream that your sweetheart has red hair, you will be
denounced by the woman you love for unfaithfulness.
Red hair usually suggests changes

If you see brown hair, you will be unfortunate in choosing a career.

If you see well kept and neatly combed hair, your fortune will improve.

To dream you cut your hair close to the scalp, denotes that
you will be generous to lavishness towards a friend.
Frugality will be the fruits growing out therefrom.

To see the hair growing out soft and luxuriant, signifies
happiness and luxury.

For a woman to compare a white hair with a black one, which she
takes from her head, foretells that she will be likely to hesitate
between two offers of seeming fortune, and unless she uses great care,
will choose the one that will afford her loss or distress instead
of pleasant fortune.

To see tangled and unkempt hair, life will be a veritable burden,
business will fall off, and the marriage yoke will be troublesome to carry.

If a woman is unsuccessful in combing her hair, she will lose
a worthy man's name by needless show of temper and disdain.

For a young woman to dream of women with gray hair, denotes that they
will come into her life as rivals in the affection of a male relative,
or displace the love of her affianced.

To dream of having your hair cut, denotes serious disappointments.

For a woman to dream that her hair is falling out, and baldness is apparent,
she will have to earn her own livelihood, as fortune has passed her by.

For man or woman to dream that they have hair of snowy whiteness,
denotes that they will enjoy a pleasing and fortunate journey through life.

For a man to caress the hair of a woman, shows he will enjoy
the love and confidence of some worthy woman who will trust
him despite the world's condemnation.

To see flowers in your hair, foretells troubles approaching which,
when they come, will give you less fear than when viewed from a distance.

For a woman to dream that her hair turns to white flowers,
augurs that troubles of a various nature will confront her,
and she does well if she strengthens her soul with patience,
and endeavors to bear her trials with fortitude.

To dream that a lock of your hair turns gray and falls out,
is a sign of trouble and disappointment in your affairs.
Sickness will cast gloom over bright expectations.

To see one's hair turn perfectly white in one night, and the face
seemingly young, foretells sudden calamity and deep grief.
For a young woman to have this dream, signifies that she
will lose her lover by a sudden sickness or accident.
She will likely come to grief from some indiscretion on her part.
She should be careful of her associates.

_Hair-dresser_.

Should you visit a hair-dresser in your dreams, you will be connected
with a sensation caused by the indiscretion of a good looking woman.
To a woman, this dream means a family disturbance and well merited censures.

For a woman to dream of having her hair colored, she will narrowly escape
the scorn of society, as enemies will seek to blight her reputation.
To have her hair dressed, denotes that she will run after frivolous things,
and use any means to bend people to her wishes,

_Hairy Hands_.

To dream that your hands are covered with hair like that of a beast,
signifies you will intrigue against innocent people, and will find
that you have alert enemies who are working to forestall your designs.

_Halter_.

To dream that you put a halter on a young horse, shows that
you will manage a very prosperous and clean business.
Love matters will shape themselves to suit you.

To see other things haltered, denotes that fortune will be withheld
from you for a while.  You will win it, but with much toil.

_Ham_.

To dream of seeing hams, signifies you are in danger
of being treacherously used.  To cut large slices of ham,
denotes that all opposition will be successfully met by you.
To dress a ham, signifies you will be leniently treated by others.

To dream of dealing in hams, prosperity will come to you.
Also good health is foreboded.

To eat ham, you will lose something of great value.  To smell ham cooking,
you will be benefited by the enterprises of others.

_Hammer_.

To dream of seeing a hammer, denotes you will have some discouraging
obstacles to overcome in order to establish firmly your fortune.

_Hand_.[86]

If you see beautiful hands in your dream, you will enjoy
great distinction, and rise rapidly in your calling; but ugly
and malformed hands point to disappointments and poverty.
To see blood on them, denotes estrangement and unjust censure
from members of your family.

If you have an injured hand, some person will succeed to what you
are striving most to obtain.

To see a detached hand, indicates a solitary life, that is,
people will fail to understand your views and feelings.
To burn your hands, you will overreach the bounds of reason
in your struggles for wealth and fame, and lose thereby.

To see your hands covered with hair, denotes that you will not become
a solid and leading factor in your circle.

To see your hands enlarged, denotes a quick advancement in your affairs.
To see them smaller, the reverse is predicted.

To see your hands soiled, denotes that you will be envious
and unjust to others.

To wash your hands, you will participate in some joyous festivity.

For a woman to admire her own hands, is proof that she will win and hold
the sincere regard of the man she prizes above all others.

To admire the hands of others, she will be subjected to the whims
of a jealous man.  To have a man hold her hands, she will be
enticed into illicit engagements.  If she lets others kiss
her hands, she will have gossips busy with her reputation.
To handle fire without burning her hands, she will rise to high
rank and commanding positions.

To dream that your hands are tied, denotes that you will be involved
in difficulties.  In loosening them, you will force others to submit
to your dictations.


[86] See Fingers.

_Handbills_.

To dream of distributing handbills over the country, is a sign
of contentions and possible lawsuits.

If you dream of printing handbills, you will hear unfavorable news.

_Handcuffs_.

To find yourself handcuffed, you will be annoyed and vexed by enemies.
To see others thus, you will subdue those oppressing you and rise
above your associates.

To see handcuffs, you will be menaced with sickness and danger.

To dream of handcuffs, denotes formidable enemies are surrounding you
with objectionable conditions.  To break them, is a sign that you
will escape toils planned by enemies.

_Handkerchiefs_.

To dream of handkerchiefs, denotes flirtations and contingent affairs.

To lose one, omens a broken engagement through no fault of yours.

To see torn ones, foretells that lovers' quarrels will reach such straits
that reconciliation will be improbable if not impossible.

To see them soiled, foretells that you will be corrupted
by indiscriminate associations.

To see pure white ones in large lots, foretells that you will resist
the insistent flattery of unscrupulous and evil-minded persons,
and thus gain entrance into high relations with love and matrimony.

To see them colored, denotes that while your engagements may not be
strictly moral, you will manage them with such ingenuity that they
will elude opprobrium.

If you see silk handkerchiefs, it denotes that your pleasing
and magnetic personality will shed its radiating cheerfulness
upon others, making for yourself a fortunate existence.

For a young woman to wave adieu or a recognition with her handkerchief,
or see others doing this, denotes that she will soon make a questionable
pleasure trip, or she may knowingly run the gauntlet of disgrace to secure
some fancied pleasure.

_Handsome_.

To see yourself handsome-looking in your dreams, you will prove
yourself an ingenious flatterer.

To see others appearing handsome, denotes that you will enjoy
the confidence of fast people.

_Handwriting_.

To dream that you see and recognize your own handwriting,
foretells that malicious enemies will use your expressed opinion
to foil you in advancing to some competed position.

_Hanging_.[87]

To see a large concourse of people gathering at a hanging,
denotes that many enemies will club together to try to demolish
your position in their midst.


[87] See Execution.

_Hare_.[88]

If you see a hare escaping from you in a dream, you will lose
something valuable in a mysterious way.  If you capture one,
you will be the victor in a contest.

If you make pets of them, you will have an orderly
but unintelligent companion.

A dead hare, betokens death to some friend.  Existence will be
a prosy affair.

To see hares chased by dogs, denotes trouble and contentions
among your friends, and you will concern yourself to bring
about friendly relations.

If you dream that you shoot a hare, you will be forced to use
violent measures to maintain your rightful possessions.


[88] See Rabbit.

_Harem_.

To dream that you maintain a harem, denotes that you are wasting
your best energies on low pleasures.  Life holds fair promises,
if your desires are rightly directed.

If a woman dreams that she is an inmate of a harem, she will seek
pleasure where pleasure is unlawful, as her desires will be toward
married men as a rule.  If she dreams that she is a favorite of
a harem, she will be preferred before others in material pleasures,
but the distinction will be fleeting.

_Harlequin_.

To dream of a harlequin cheating you, you will find uphill
work to identify certain claims that promise profit to you.
If you dream of a harlequin, trouble will beset you.

To be dressed as a harlequin, denotes passionate error and unwise attacks
on strength and purse.  Designing women will lure you to paths of sin.

_Harlot_.

To dream of being in the company of a harlot, denotes ill-chosen pleasures
and trouble in your social circles, and business will suffer depression.
If you marry one, life will be threatened by an enemy.

_Harness_.

To dream of possessing bright new harness, you will soon prepare
for a pleasant journey.

_Harp_.

To hear the sad sweet strains of a harp, denotes the sad ending
to what seems a pleasing and profitable enterprise.

To see a broken harp, betokens illness, or broken troth between lovers.

To play a harp yourself, signifies that your nature is too trusting,
and you should be more careful in placing your confidence as well
as love matters.

_Harvest_.

To dream of harvest time, is a forerunner of prosperity and pleasure.
If the harvest yields are abundant, the indications are good for country
and state, as political machinery will grind to advance all conditions.

A poor harvest is a sign of small profits.

_Hash_.

To dream you are eating hash, many sorrows and vexations are foretold.

You will probably be troubled with various little jealousies and contentions
over mere trifles, and your health will be menaced through worry.

For a woman to dream that she cooks hash, denotes that she will be jealous
of her husband, and children will be a stumbling block to her wantonness.

_Hassock_.

To dream of a hassock, forebodes the yielding of your power
and fortune to another.  If a woman dreams of a hassock,
she should cultivate spirit and independence.

_Hat_.

To dream of losing your hat, you may expect unsatisfactory business
and failure of persons to keep important engagements.

For a man to dream that he wears a new hat, predicts change
of place and business, which will be very much to his advantage.
For a woman to dream that she wears a fine new hat,
denotes the attainment of wealth, and she will be the object
of much admiration.

For the wind to blow your hat off, denotes sudden changes in affairs,
and somewhat for the worse.

_Hatchet_.

A hatchet seen in a dream, denotes that wanton wastefulness
will expose you to the evil designs of envious persons.
If it is rusty or broken, you will have grief over wayward people.

_Hate_.

To dream that you hate a person, denotes that if you are not careful you
will do the party an inadvertent injury or a spiteful action will bring
business loss and worry.

If you are hated for unjust causes, you will find sincere and
obliging friends, and your associations will be most pleasant.
Otherwise, the dream forebodes ill.

_Hawk_.

To dream of a hawk, foretells you will be cheated in some way
by intriguing persons.  To shoot one, foretells you will surmount
obstacles after many struggles.  For a young woman to frighten
hawks away from her chickens, signifies she will obtain her most
extravagant desires through diligent attention to her affairs.

It also denotes that enemies are near you, and they
are ready to take advantage of your slightest mistakes.
If you succeed in scaring it away before your fowls are injured,
you will be lucky in your business.

To see a dead hawk, signifies that your enemies will be vanquished.

To dream of shooting at a hawk, you will have a contest with enemies,
and will probably win.

_Hay_.

If you dream of mowing hay, you will find much good in life,
and if a farmer your crops will yield abundantly.

To see fields of newly cut hay, is a sign of unusual prosperity.

If you are hauling and putting hay into barns, your fortune is assured,
and you will realize great profit from some enterprise.

To see loads of hay passing through the street, you will meet
influential strangers who will add much to your pleasure.

To feed hay to stock, indicates that you will offer aid to some one who will
return the favor with love and advancement to higher states.

_Head_.

To see a person's head in your dream, and it is well-shaped and prominent,
you will meet persons of power and vast influence who will lend you aid
in enterprises of importance.

If you dream of your own head, you are threatened with nervous
or brain trouble.

To see a head severed from its trunk, and bloody, you will meet
sickening disappointments, and the overthrow of your dearest
hopes and anticipations.

To see yourself with two or more heads, foretells phenomenal and rapid rise
in life, but the probabilities are that the rise will not be stable.

To dream that your head aches, denotes that you will be oppressed with worry.

To dream of a swollen head, you will have more good than bad in your life.

To dream of a child's head, there will be much pleasure ill store
for you and signal financial success.

To dream of the head of a beast, denotes that the nature of your desires
will run on a low plane, and only material pleasures will concern you.

To wash your head, you will be sought after by prominent people
for your judgment and good counsel.

_Headgear_.

To dream of seeing rich headgear, you will become famous and successful.
To see old and worn headgear, you will have to yield up your
possessions to others.

_Hearse_.

To dream of a hearse, denotes uncongenial relations in the home,
and failure to carry on business in a satisfactory manner.
It also betokens the death of one near to you, or sickness and sorrow.

If a hearse crosses your path, you will have a bitter enemy to overcome.

_Heart_.

To dream of your heart paining and suffocating you, there will be trouble
in your business.  Some mistake of your own will bring loss if not corrected.

Seeing your heart, foretells sickness and failure of energy.

To see the heart of an animal, you will overcome enemies and merit
the respect of all.

To eat the heart of a chicken, denotes strange desires will cause
you to carry out very difficult projects for your advancement.

_Heat_.

To dream that you are oppressed by heat, denotes failure
to carry out designs on account of some friend betraying you.
Heat is not a very favorable dream.

_Heather Bells_.

To dream of heather bells, foretells that joyous occasions will pass
you in happy succession.

_Heaven_.

If you ascend to heaven in a dream, you will fail to enjoy the distinction
you have labored to gain,, and joy will end in sadness.

If young persons dream of climbing to heaven on a ladder,
they will rise from a low estate to one of unusual prominence,
but will fail to find contentment or much pleasure.

To dream of being in heaven and meeting Christ and friends,
you will meet with many losses, but will reconcile yourself
to them through your true understanding of human nature.

To dream of the Heavenly City, denotes a contented and spiritual nature,
and trouble will do you small harm.

_Hedges_.

To dream of hedges of evergreens, denotes joy and profit.

Bare hedges, foretells distress and unwise dealings.

If a young woman dreams of walking beside a green hedge with her lover,
it foretells that her marriage will soon be consummated.

If you dream of being entangled in a thorny hedge, you will be hampered
in your business by unruly partners or persons working under you.
To lovers, this dream is significant of quarrels and jealousies.

_Heir_.

To dream that you fall heir to property or valuables,
denotes that you are in danger of losing what you already possess.
and warns you of coming responsibilities.  Pleasant surprises
may also follow this dream.

_Hell_.

If you dream of being in hell, you will fall into temptations,
which will almost wreck you financially and morally.

To see your friends in hell, denotes distress and burdensome cares.
You will hear of the misfortune of some friend.

To dream of crying in hell, denotes the powerlessness of friends
to extricate you from the snares of enemies.

_Helmet_.

To dream of seeing a helmet, denotes threatened misery and loss
will be avoided by wise action.

_Hemp_.

To dream of hemp, denotes you will be successful in all undertakings,
especially large engagements.  For a young woman to dream that some
accident befalls her through cultivating hemp, foretells the fatal
quarrel and separation from her friend.

_Hemp Seed_.

To see hemp seed in dreams, denotes the near approach of a deep
and continued friendship.  To the business man, is shown favorable
opportunity for money-making.

_Hen_.[89]

To dream of hens, denotes pleasant family reunions with added members.


[89] See Chickens.

_Herbs_.

To dream of herbs, denotes that you will have vexatious cares,
though some pleasures will ensue.

To dream of poisonous herbs, warns you of enemies.

Balm and other useful herbs, denotes satisfaction in business
and warm friendships.

_Hermit_.

To dream of a hermit, denotes sadness and loneliness caused
by the unfaithfulness of friends.

If you are a hermit yourself, you will pursue researches into
intricate subjects, and will take great interest in the discussions
of the hour.

To find yourself in the abode of a hermit, denotes unselfishness toward
enemies and friends alike.

_Herring_.

To dream of seeing herring, indicates a tight squeeze to escape
financial embarrassment, but you will have success later.

_Hide_.

To dream of the hide of an animal, denotes profit and permanent employment.

_Hidden_.

To dream that you have hidden away any object, denotes embarrassment
in your circumstances.

To find hidden things, you will enjoy unexpected pleasures.

For a young woman to dream of hiding objects, she will be the object
of much adverse gossip, but will finally prove her conduct orderly.

_Hieroglyphs_.

Hieroglyphs seen in a dream, foretells that wavering judgment
in some vital matter may cause you great distress and money loss.
To be able to read them, your success in overcoming some
evil is foretold.

_High School_.

To dream of a high school, foretells ascension to more elevated
positions in love, as well as social and business affairs.
For a young woman to be suspended from a high school,
foretells she will have troubles in social circles.

_High Tide_.

To dream of high tide is indicative of favorable progression
in your affairs.

_Hills_.[90]

To dream of climbing hills is good if the top is reached,
but if you fall back, you will have much envy and contrariness
to fight against.


[90] See Ascend and Descend.

_Hips_.

To dream that you admire well-formed hips, denotes that you
will be upbraided by your wife.

For a woman to admire her hips, shows she will be disappointed
in love matters.

To notice fat hips on animals, foretells ease and pleasure.

For a woman to dream that her hips are too narrow, omens sickness
and disappointments.  If too fat, she is in danger of losing her reputation.

_Hissing_.

To dream of hissing persons, is an omen that you will be
displeased beyond endurance at the discourteous treatment shown
you while among newly made acquaintances.  If they hiss you,
you will be threatened with the loss of a friend.

_History_.

To dream that you are reading history, indicates a long
and pleasant recreation.

_Hives_.

To dream that your child is affected with hives, denotes that it will enjoy
good health and be docile.

To see strange children thus affected, you will be unduly frightened
over the condition of some favorite.

_Hoe_.

To dream of seeing a hoe, denotes that you will have no time
for idle pleasures, as there will be others depending upon
your work for subsistence.

To dream of using a hoe, you will enjoy freedom from poverty by directing
your energy into safe channels.

For a woman to dream of hoeing, she will be independent of others, as she
will be self-supporting. For lovers, this dream is a sign of faithfulness.

To dream of a foe striking at you with a hoe, your interests
will be threatened by enemies, but with caution you will keep
aloof from real danger.

_Hogs_.

To dream of seeing fat, strong-looking hogs, foretells brisk changes
in business and safe dealings.  Lean hogs predict vexatious affairs
and trouble with servants and children.

To see a sow and litter of pigs, denotes abundant crops to the farmer,
and advance in the affairs of others.

To hear hogs squealing, denotes unpleasant news from absent friends,
and foretells disappointment by death, or failure to realize the amounts
you expected in deals of importance.

To dream of feeding your own hogs, denotes an increase in
your personal belongings.

To dream that you are dealing in hogs, you will accumulate
considerable property, but you will have much rough work to perform.

_Holiday_.

To dream of a holiday, foretells interesting strangers will soon
partake of your hospitality.  For a young woman to dream that she
is displeased with a holiday, denotes she will be fearful of her own
attractions in winning a friend back from a rival.

_Holy Communion_.

To dream that you are taking part in the Holy Communion,
warns you that you will resign your independent opinions to gain
some frivolous desire.

If you dream that there is neither bread nor wine for the supper,
you will find that you have suffered your ideas to be proselytized
in vain, as you are no nearer your goal.

If you are refused the right of communion and feel worthy, there is
hope for your obtaining some prominent position which has appeared
extremely doubtful, as your opponents are popular and powerful.
If you feel unworthy, you will meet with much discomfort.

To dream that you are in a body of Baptists who are taking communion,
denotes that you will find that your friends are growing uncongenial,
and you will look to strangers for harmony.

_Home_.[91]

To dream of visiting your old home, you will have good news
to rejoice over.

To see your old home in a dilapidated state, warns you of the sickness
or death of a relative.  For a young woman this is a dream of sorrow.
She will lose a dear friend.

To go home and find everything cheery and comfortable, denotes harmony
in the present home life and satisfactory results in business.


[91] See Abode.

_Hominy_.

To dream of hominy, denotes pleasant love-making will furnish
you interesting recreation from absorbing study and planning
for future progression.

_Homesick_.

To dream of being homesick, foretells you will lose fortunate opportunities
to enjoy travels of interest and pleasant visits.

_Homicide_.[92]

To dream that you commit homicide, foretells that you will suffer
great anguish and humiliation through the indifference of others,
and your gloomy surroundings will cause perplexing worry to those
close to you.

To dream that a friend commits suicide, you will have trouble
in deciding a very important question.


[92] See Kill.

_Honey_.

To dream that you see honey, you will be possessed of considerable wealth.

To see strained honey, denotes wealth and ease, but there
will be an undercurrent in your life of unlawful gratification
of material desires.

To dream of eating honey, foretells that you will attain wealth and love.
To lovers, this indicates a swift rush into marital joys.

_Honeysuckle_.

To see or gather, honeysuckles, denotes that you will be contentedly
prosperous and your marriage will be a singularly happy one.

_Hood_.

For a young woman to dream that she is wearing a hood, is a sign she
will attempt to allure some man from rectitude and bounden duty.

_Hook_.

To dream of a hook, foretells unhappy obligations will be assumed by you.

_Hoop_.

To dream of a hoop, foretells you will form influential friendships.
Many will seek counsel of you.  To jump through, or see others
jumping through hoops, denotes you will have discouraging outlooks,
but you will overcome them with decisive victory.

_Hops_.

To dream of hops, denotes thrift, energy and the power to grasp and master
almost any business proposition.  Hops is a favorable dream to all classes,
lovers and tradesmen.

_Horn_.

To dream that you hear the sound of a horn, foretells hasty news
of a joyful character.

To see a broken horn, denotes death or accident.

To see children playing with horns, denotes congeniality in the home.

For a woman to dream of blowing a horn, foretells that she is more anxious
for marriage than her lover.

_Hornet_.

To dream of a hornet, signals disruption to lifelong friendship,
and loss of money.

For a young woman to dream that one stings her, or she is in a nest
of them, foretells that many envious women will seek to disparage
her before her admirers.

_Horoscope_.

To dream of having your horoscope drawn by an astrologist,
foretells unexpected changes in affairs and a long journey;
associations with a stranger will probably happen.

If the dreamer has the stars pointed out to him, as his fate is being read,
he will find disappointments where fortune and pleasure seem to await him.

_Horse_.

If you dream of seeing or riding a white horse, the indications are
favorable for prosperity and pleasurable commingling with congenial
friends and fair women.  If the white horse is soiled and lean,
your confidence will be betrayed by a jealous friend or a woman.
If the horse is black, you will be successful in your fortune,
but you will practice deception, and will be guilty of assignations.
To a woman, this dream denotes that her husband is unfaithful.

To dream of dark horses, signifies prosperous conditions,
but a large amount of discontent.  Fleeting pleasures usually
follow this dream.

To see yourself riding a fine bay horse, denotes a rise in fortune
and gratification of passion.  For a woman, it foretells a yielding
to importunate advances.  She will enjoy material things.

To ride or see passing horses, denotes ease and comfort.

To ride a runaway horse, your interests will be injured by the folly
of a friend or employer.

To see a horse running away with others, denotes that you will hear
of the illness of friends.

To see fine stallions, is a sign of success and high living,
and undue passion will master you.

To see brood mares, denotes congeniality and absence of jealousy
between the married and sweethearts.

To ride a horse to ford a stream, you will soon experience some good fortune
and will enjoy rich pleasures.  If the stream is unsettled or murky,
anticipated joys will be somewhat disappointing.

To swim on a horse's back through a clear and beautiful stream of water,
your conception of passionate bliss will be swiftly realized.
To a business man, this dream portends great gain.

To see a wounded horse, foretells the trouble of friends.

To dream of a dead horse, signifies disappointments of various kinds.

To dream of riding a horse that bucks, denotes that your desires
will be difficult of consummation.  To dream that he throws you,
you will have a strong rival, and your business will suffer
slightly through competition.

To dream that a horse kicks you, you will be repulsed by one you love.
Your fortune will be embarrassed by ill health.

To dream of catching a horse to bridle and saddle, or harness it,
you will see a great improvement in business of all kinds,
and people of all callings will prosper.  If you fail to catch it,
fortune will play you false.

To see spotted horses, foretells that various enterprises
will bring you profit.

To dream of having a horse shod, your success is assured.
For a woman, this dream omens a good and faithful husband.

To dream that you shoe a horse, denotes that you will endeavor
to and perhaps make doubtful property your own.

To dream of race horses, denotes that you will be surfeited with fast living,
but to the farmer this dream denotes prosperity.

To dream that you ride a horse in a race, you will be prosperous
and enjoy life.

To dream of killing a horse, you will injure your friends through selfishness.

To mount a horse bareback, you will gain wealth and ease by hard struggles.

To ride bareback in company with men, you will have honest
people to aid you, and your success will be merited.
If in company with women, your desires will be loose, and your
prosperity will not be so abundant as might be if women did
not fill your heart.

To curry a horse, your business interests will not be neglected
for frivolous pleasures.

To dream of trimming a horse's mane, or tail, denotes that you will be
a good financier or farmer.  Literary people will be painstaking in their
work and others will look after their interest with solicitude.

To dream of horses, you will amass wealth and enjoy life
to its fullest extent.

To see horses pulling vehicles, denotes wealth with some incumbrance,
and love will find obstacles.

If you are riding up a hill and the horse falls but you gain the top,
you will win fortune, though you will have to struggle against
enemies and jealousy.  If both the horse and you get to the top,
your rise will be phenomenal, but substantial.

For a young girl to dream that she rides a black horse,
denotes that she should be dealt with by wise authority.
Some wishes will be gratified at an unexpected time.
Black in horses, signifies postponements in anticipations.

To see a horse with a tender foot, denotes that some unexpected unpleasantness
will insinuate itself into your otherwise propitious state.

If you attempt to fit a broken shoe which is too small for the horse's foot,
you will be charged with making fraudulent deals with unsuspecting parties.

To ride a horse down hill, your affairs will undoubtedly disappoint you.
For a young woman to dream that a friend rides behind her on a horse,
denotes that she will be foremost in the favors of many prominent
and successful men.  If she was frightened, she is likely to stir up
jealous sensations.  If after she alights from the horse it turns
into a pig, she will carelessly pass by honorable offers of marriage,
preferring freedom until her chances of a desirable marriage are lost.
If afterward she sees the pig sliding gracefully along the telegraph wire,
she will by intriguing advance her position,

For a young woman to dream that she is riding a white horse up and
down hill, often looking back and seeing some one on a black horse,
pursuing her, denotes she will have a mixed season of success
and sorow,{sic} but through it all a relentless enemy is working
to overshadow her with gloom and disappointment.

To see a horse in human flesh, descending on a hammock through
the air, and as it nears your house is metamorphosed into a man,
and he approaches your door and throws something at you which seems
to be rubber but turns into great bees, denotes miscarriage
of hopes and useless endeavors to regain lost valuables.
To see animals in human flesh, signifies great advancement to the dreamer,
and new friends will be made by modest wearing of well-earned honors.
If the human flesh appears diseased or freckled, the miscarriage
of well-laid plans is denoted.

_Horseshoe_.

To dream of a horseshoe, indicates advance in business and lucky
engagements for women.

To see them broken, ill fortune and sickness is portrayed.

To find a horseshoe hanging on the fence, denotes that your interests
will advance beyond your most sanguine expectations.

To pick one up in the road, you will receive profit from a source
you know not of.

_Horseradish_.

To dream of horseradish, foretells pleasant associations with intellectual
and congenial people.  Fortune is also expressed in this dream.
For a woman, it indicates a rise above her present station.

To eat horseradish, you will be the object of pleasant raillery.

_Horse-trader_.

To dream of a horse-trader, signifies great profit from perilous ventures.

To dream that you are trading horses, and the trader cheats you,
you will lose in trade or love.  If you get a better horse than
the one you traded, you will better yourself in fortune.

_Hospital_.

If you dream that you are a patient in a hospital.  you will have a
contagious disease in your community, and will narrowly escape affliction.
If you visit patients there, you will hear distressing news of the absent.

_Hotel_.

To dream of living in a hotel, denotes ease and profit.

To visit women in a hotel, your life will be rather on a dissolute order.

To dream of seeing a fine hotel, indicates wealth and travel.

If you dream that you are the proprietor of a hotel, you will earn
all the fortune you will ever possess.

To work in a hotel, you could find a more remunerative employment
than what you have.

To dream of hunting a hotel, you will be baffled in your search
for wealth and happiness.

_Hounds_.[93]

To dream of hounds on a hunt, denotes coming delights and pleasant changes.
For a woman to dream of hounds, she will love a man below her in station.
To dream that hounds are following her, she will have many admirers,
but there will be no real love felt for her.


[93] See Dogs.

_House_.[94]

To dream of building a house, you will make wise changes
in your present affairs.

To dream that you own an elegant house, denotes that you will soon
leave your home for a better, and fortune will be kind to you.

Old and dilapidated houses, denote failure in business or any effort,
and declining health.


[94] See Building.

_Housekeeper_.

To dream that you are a housekeeper, denotes you will have labors
which will occupy your time, and make pleasure an ennobling thing.
To employ one, signifies comparative comfort will be possible
for your obtaining.

_Hugging_.

If you dream of hugging, you will be disappointed in love affairs
and in business.

For a woman to dream of hugging a man, she will accept advances
of a doubtful character from men.

For a married woman to hug others than her husband, she will endanger
her honor in accepting attentions from others in her husband's absence.

_Humidity_.[95]

To dream that you are overcome with humidity, foretells that you
will combat enemies fiercely, but their superior force will submerge
you in overwhelming defeat.


[95] See Air.

_Hunchback_.

To dream of a hunchback, denotes unexpected reverses in your prospects.

_Hunger_.

To dream that you are hungry, is an unfortunate omen.
You will not find comfort and satisfaction in your home,
and to lovers it means an unhappy marriage.

_Hunting_.[96]

If you dream of hunting, you will struggle for the unattainable.

If you dream that you hunt game and find it, you will overcome
obstacles and gain your desires.


[96] See Gain.

_Hurt_.

If you hurt a person in your dreams, you will do ugly work,
revenging and injuring.

If you are hurt, you will have enemies who will overcome you.

_Hurricane_.

To hear the roar and see a hurricane heading towards you with
its frightful force, you will undergo torture and suspense,
striving to avert failure and ruin in your affairs.

If you are in a house which is being blown to pieces by a hurricane,
and you struggle in the awful gloom to extricate some one
from the falling timbers, your life will suffer a change.
You will move and remove to distant places, and still find
no improvement in domestic or business affairs.

If you dream of looking on de'bris and havoc wrought by a hurricane,
you will come close to trouble, which will be averted by the turn
in the affairs of others.

To see dead and wounded caused by a hurricane, you will be much
distressed over the troubles of others.

_Husband_.

To dream that your husband is leaving you, and you do not understand why,
there will be bitterness between you, but an unexpected reconciliation
will ensue.  If he mistreats and upbraids you for unfaithfulness,
you will hold his regard and confidence, but other worries will ensue
and you are warned to be more discreet in receiving attention from men.

If you see him dead, disappointment and sorrow will envelop you.

To see him pale and careworn, sickness will tax you heavily,
as some of the family will linger in bed for a time.

To see him gay and handsome, your home will be filled with
happiness and bright prospects will be yours.  If he is sick,
you will be mistreated by him and he will be unfaithful.

To dream that he is in love with another woman, he will soon tire
of his present surroundings and seek pleasure elsewhere.

To be in love with another woman's husband in your dreams,
denotes that you are not happily married, or that you are not
happy unmarried, but the chances for happiness are doubtful.

For an unmarried woman to dream that she has a husband, denotes that she
is wanting in the graces which men most admire.

To see your husband depart from you, and as he recedes from you he grows
larger, inharmonious surroundings will prevent immediate congeniality.
If disagreeable conclusions are avoided, harmony will be reinstated.

For a woman to dream she sees her husband in a compromising
position with an unsuspected party, denotes she will have trouble
through the indiscretion of friends.  If she dreams that he is
killed while with another woman, and a scandal ensues, she will
be in danger of separating from her husband or losing property.
Unfavorable conditions follow this dream, though the evil
is often exaggerated.

_Hut_.

To dream of a hut, denotes indifferent success.

To dream that you are sleeping in a hut, denotes ill
health and dissatisfaction.

To see a hut in a green pasture, denotes prosperity,
but fluctuating happiness.

_Hyacinth_.

To dream that you see, or gather, hyacinths, you are about to undergo
a painful separation from a friend, which will ultimately result
in good for you.

_Hydrophobia_.

To dream that you are afflicted with hydrophobia, denotes enemies
and change of business.

To see others thus afflicted, your work will be interrupted by death
or ungrateful dependence.

To dream that an animal with the rabies bites you, you will be betrayed
by your dearest friend, and much scandal will be brought to light.

_Hyena_.

If you see a hyena in your dreams, you will meet much disappointment and much
ill luck in your undertakings, and your companions will be very uncongenial.
If lovers have this dream, they will often be involved in quarrels.

If one attacks you, your reputation will be set upon by busybodies.

_Hymns_.[97]

To dream of hearing hymns sung, denotes contentment in the home
and average prospects in business affairs.


[97] See Singing.

_Hypocrite_.

To dream that anyone has acted the hypocrite with you, you will be turned
over to your enemies by false friends.

To dream that you are a hypocrite, denotes that you will prove yourself
a deceiver and be false to friends.

_Hyssop_.

To dream of hyssop, denotes you will have grave charges preferred
against you; and, if a woman, your reputation will be endangered.



I.

``_And it shall come to pass in the last days, sayeth God, I will pour out my
spirit upon all flesh; and your sons and your daughters shall see visions,
and your old men shall dream dreams_.''--Acts ii, 17.

_Ice_.

To dream of ice, betokens much distress, and evil-minded persons
will seek to injure you in your best work.

To see ice floating in a stream of clear water, denotes that your happiness
will be interrupted by ill-tempered and jealous friends.

To dream that you walk on ice, you risk much solid comfort and respect
for evanescent joys.

For a young woman to walk on ice, is a warning that only a thin
veil hides her from shame.

To see icicles on the eaves of houses, denotes misery and want of comfort.
Ill health is foreboded.

To see icicles on the fence, denotes suffering bodily and mentally.

To see them on trees, despondent hopes will grow gloomier.

To see them on evergreens, a bright future will be overcast with the shadow
of doubtful honors.

To dream that you make ice, you will make a failure of your life
through egotism and selfishness.

Eating ice, foretells sickness.  If you drink ice-water, you will bring
ill health from dissipation.

Bathing in ice-water, anticipated pleasures will be interrupted
with an unforeseen event.

_Ice Cream_.

To dream that you are eating ice cream, foretells you
will have happy success in affairs already undertaken.
To see children eating it, denotes prosperity and happiness
will attend you most favorably.

For a young woman to upset her ice cream in the presence
of her lover or friend, denotes she will be flirted with
because of her unkindness to others.  To see sour ice cream,
denotes some unexpected trouble will interfere with your pleasures.
If it is melted, your anticipated pleasure will reach stagnation
before it is realized.

_Icicles_.[98]

To see icicles falling from trees, denotes that some distinctive misfortune,
or trouble, will soon vanish.


[98] See Ice.

_Ideal_.

For a young woman to dream of meeting her ideal,
foretells a season of uninterrupted pleasure and contentment.
For a bachelor to dream of meeting his ideal, denotes he will
soon experience a favorable change in his affairs.

_Idiot_.

Idiots in a dream, foretells disagreements and losses.

To dream that you are an idiot, you will feel humiliated and downcast
over the miscarriage of plans.

To see idiotic children, denotes affliction and unhappy changes in life.

_Idle_.

If you dream of being idle, you will fail to accomplish your designs.

To see your friends in idleness, you will hear of some trouble affecting them.

For a young woman to dream that she is leading an idle existence,
she will fall into bad habits, and is likely to marry a shiftless man.

_Idols_.

Should you dream of worshiping idols, you will make slow progress to wealth
or fame, as you will let petty things tyrannize over you.

To break idols, signifies a strong mastery over self, and no work
will deter you in your upward rise to positions of honor.

To see others worshiping idols, great differences will rise up
between you and warm friends.

To dream that you are denouncing idolatry, great distinction
is in store for you through your understanding of the natural
inclinations of the human mind.

_Illness_.[99]

For a woman to dream of her own illness, foretells that some unforeseen
event will throw her into a frenzy of despair by causing her to miss
some anticipated visit or entertainment.


[99] See Sickness.

_Illumination_.

If you see strange and weird illuminations in your dreams,
you will meet with disappointments and failures on every hand.

Illuminated faces, indicate unsettled business, both private and official.

To see the heavens illuminated, with the moon in all her weirdness,
unnatural stars and a red sun, or a golden one, you may look
for distress in its worst form.  Death, family troubles,
and national upheavals will occur.

To see children in the lighted heavens, warns you to control your feelings,
as irrevocable wrong may be done in a frenzy of feeling arising over seeming
neglect by your dear ones.

To see illuminated human figures or animals in the heavens,
denotes failure and trouble; dark clouds overshadow fortune.
To see them fall to the earth and men shoot them with guns,
many troubles and obstacles will go to nought before your energy
and determination to rise.

To see illuminated snakes, or any other creeping thing, enemies will
surround you, and use hellish means to overthrow you.

_Image_.

If you dream that you see images, you will have poor success
in business or love.

To set up an image in your home, portends that you will be weak
minded and easily led astray.  Women should be careful of their
reputation after a dream of this kind.  If the images are ugly,
you will have trouble in your home.

_Imitation_.

To dream of imitations, means that persons are working to deceive you.
For a young woman to dream some one is imitating her lover or herself,
foretells she will be imposed upon, and will suffer for the faults of others.

_Implements_.

To dream of implements, denotes unsatisfactory means of accomplishing
some work.  If the implements are broken, you will be threatened with death
or serious illness of relatives or friends, or failure n business.

_Imps_.

To see imps in your dream, signifies trouble from what seems
a passing pleasure.

To dream that you are an imp, denotes that folly and vice will bring
you to poverty.

_Inauguration_.

To dream of inauguration, denotes you will rise to higher position than
you have yet enjoyed.  For a young woman to be disappointed in attending
an inauguration, predicts she will fail to obtain her wishes.

_Incantation_.

To dream you are using incantations, signifies unpleasantness between
husband and wife, or sweethearts.  To hear others repeating them,
implies dissembling among your friends.

_Incest_.

To dream of incestuous practices, denotes you will fall from honorable places,
and will also suffer loss in business.

_Incoherent_.

To dream of incoherency, usually denotes extreme nervousness and excitement
through the oppression of changing events.

_Income_.

To dream of coming into the possession of your income, denotes that you
may deceive some one and cause trouble to your family and friends.

To dream that some of your family inherits an income,
predicts success for you.

For a woman to dream of losing her income, signifies disappointments in life.

To dream that your income is insufficient to support you,
denotes trouble to relatives or friends.

To dream of a portion of your income remaining, signifies that you
will be very successful for a short time, but you may expect more
than you receive.

_Increase_.

To dream of an increase in your family, may denote failure
in some of your plans, and success to another.


Back to Full Books