10,000 Dreams Interpreted [Or. . ."What's In A Dream"] [Or. . .Dreams, Their Scientific and Practical Interpretations]

If drunk on wine, you will be fortunate in trade and love-making,
and will scale exalted heights in literary pursuits.
This dream is always the bearer of aesthetic experiences.

To see others in a drunken condition, foretells for you,
and probably others, unhappy states.

Drunkenness in all forms is unreliable as a good dream.
All classes are warned by this dream to shift their thoughts
into more healthful channels.

_Ducks_.

To dream of seeing wild ducks on a clear stream of water,
signifies fortunate journeys, perhaps across the sea.
White ducks around a farm, indicate thrift and a fine harvest.

To hunt ducks, denotes displacement in employment in the carrying
out of plans.

To see them shot, signifies that enemies are meddling with
your private affairs.

To see them flying, foretells a brighter future for you.
It also denotes marriage, and children in the new home.

_Duet_.

To dream of hearing a duet played, denotes a peaceful and even existence
for lovers.  No quarrels, as is customary in this sort of thing.
Business people carry on a mild rivalry.  To musical people,
this denotes competition and wrangling for superiority.

To hear a duet sung, is unpleasant tidings from the absent; but this
will not last, as some new pleasure will displace the unpleasantness.

_Dulcimer_.

To dream of a dulcimer, denotes that the highest wishes
in life will be attained by exalted qualities of mind.
To women, this is significant of a life free from those petty
jealousies which usually make women unhappy.

_Dumb_.

To dream of being dumb, indicates your inability to persuade others into your
mode of thinking, and using them for your profit by your glibness of tongue.
To the dumb, it denotes false friends.

_Dun_.

To dream that you receive a dun, warns you to look after your affairs
and correct all tendency towards neglect of business and love.

_Dungeon_.

To dream of being in a dungeon, foretells for you struggles
with the vital affairs of life but by wise dealing you will
disenthrall yourself of obstacles and the designs of enemies.
For a woman this is a dark foreboding; by her wilful indiscretion
she will lose her position among honorable people.

To see a dungeon lighted up, portends that you are threatened
with entanglements of which your better judgment warns you.

_Dunghill_.

To dream of a dunghill, you will see profits coming in through
the most unexpected sources.  To the farmer this is a lucky dream,
indicating fine seasons and abundant products from soil and stock.
For a young woman, it denotes that she will unknowingly marry a man
of great wealth.

_Dusk_.

This is a dream of sadness; it portends an early decline
and unrequited hopes.  Dark outlook for trade and pursuits
of any nature is prolonged by this dream.

_Dust_.

To dream of dust covering you, denotes that you will be slightly
injured in business by the failure of others.  For a young woman,
this denotes that she will be set aside by her lover for a newer flame.
If you free yourself of the dust by using judicious measures,
you will clear up the loss.

_Dwarf_.

This is a very favorable dream.  If the dwarf is well formed and pleasing
in appearance, it omens you will never be dwarfed in mind or stature.
Health and good constitution will admit of your engaging in many profitable
pursuits both of mind and body.

To see your friends dwarfed, denotes their health, and you
will have many pleasures through them.

Ugly and hideous dwarfs, always forebodes distressing states.

_Dye_.

To see the dyeing of cloth or garments in process, your bad or good
luck depends on the color.  Blues, reds and gold, indicate prosperity;
black and white, indicate sorrow in all forms.

_Dying_.[60]

To dream of dying, foretells that you are threatened with evil from a source
that has contributed to your former advancement and enjoyment.

To see others dying, forebodes general ill luck to you and to your friends.

To dream that you are going to die, denotes that unfortunate
inattention to your affairs will depreciate their value.
Illness threatens to damage you also.

To see animals in the throes of death, denotes escape from evil
influences if the animal be wild or savage.

It is an unlucky dream to see domestic animals dying or in agony.

[As these events of good or ill approach you they naturally
assume these forms of agonizing death, to impress you more
fully with the joyfulness or the gravity of the situation you
are about to enter on awakening to material responsibilities,
to aid you in the mastery of self which is essential to meeting
all conditions with calmness and determination.]


[60] See Death.

_Dynamite_.

To see dynamite in a dream, is a sign of approaching change
and the expanding of one's affairs.  To be frightened by it,
indicates that a secret enemy is at work against you,
and if you are not careful of your conduct he will disclose
himself at an unexpected and helpless moment.

_Dynamo_.

To dream of a dynamo, omens successful enterprises if attention
is shown to details of business.  One out of repair, shows you
are nearing enemies who will involve you in trouble.



E.

``_And he said, hear now my words, if there be a Prophet among you,
I the Lord will make myself known unto him in a vision, and will speak
unto him in a dream_.''--Numbers xii., 6.

_Eagles_.

To see one soaring above you, denotes lofty ambitions which you will struggle
fiercely to realize, nevertheless you will gain your desires.

To see one perched on distant heights, denotes that you will possess fame,
wealth and the highest position attainable in your country.

To see young eagles in their eyrie, signifies your association with people
of high standing, and that you will profit from wise counsel from them.
You will in time come into a rich legacy.

To dream that you kill an eagle, portends that no obstacles whatever would
be allowed to stand before you and the utmost heights of your ambition.
You will overcome your enemies and be possessed of untold wealth.

Eating the flesh of one, denotes the possession of a powerful will
that would not turn aside in ambitious struggles even for death.
You will come immediately into rich possessions.

To see a dead eagle killed by others than yourself, signifies high rank
and fortune will be wrested from you ruthlessly.

To ride on an eagle's back, denotes that you will make a long voyage
into almost unexplored countries in your search for knowledge and wealth
which you will eventually gain.

_Ears_.

To dream of seeing ears, an evil and designing person is keeping
watch over your conversation to work you harm.

_Earrings_.

To see earrings in dreams, omens good news and interesting work
is before you.  To see them broken, indicates that gossip of a low
order will be directed against you.

_Earthquake_.

To see or feel the earthquake in your dream, denotes business failure
and much distress caused from turmoils and wars between nations.

_Earwig_.

To dream that you see an earwig or have one in your ear, denotes that you
will have unpleasant news affecting your business or family relations.

_Eating_.[61]

To dream of eating alone, signifies loss and melancholy spirits.
To eat with others, denotes personal gain, cheerful environments
and prosperous undertakings.

If your daughter carries away the platter of meat before you
are done eating, it foretells that you will have trouble
and vexation from those beneath you or dependent upon you.
The same would apply to a waiter or waitress.


[61] See other subjects similar.

_Ebony_.

If you dream of ebony furniture or other articles of ebony,
you will have many distressing disputes and quarrels in your home.

_Echo_.

To dream of an echo, portends that distressful times are upon you.
Your sickness may lose you your employment, and friends will desert
you in time of need.

_Eclipse_.

To dream of the eclipse of the sun, denotes temporary failure in business
and other secular affairs, also disturbances in families.

The eclipse of the moon, portends contagious disease or death.

_Ecstasy_.

To dream of feeling ecstasy, denotes you will enjoy a visit from
a long-absent friend.  If you experience ecstasy in disturbing
dreams you will be subjected to sorrow and disappointment.

_Education_.

To dream that you are anxious to obtain an education, shows that whatever
your circumstances in life may be there will be a keen desire for knowledge
on your part, which will place you on a higher plane than your associates.
Fortune will also be more lenient to you.

To dream that you are in places of learning, foretells for you
many influential friends.

_Eel_.

To dream of an eel is good if you can maintain your grip on him.
Otherwise fortune will be fleeting.

To see an eel in clear water, denotes, for a woman,
new but evanescent pleasures.

To see a dead eel, signifies that you will overcome your most maliciously
inclined enemies.  To lovers, the dream denotes an end to long and hazardous
courtship by marriage.

_Eggs_.

To dream of finding a nest of eggs, denotes wealth of a substantial
character, happiness among the married and many children.
This dream signifies many and varied love affairs to women.

To eat eggs, denotes that unusual disturbances threaten you in your home.

To see broken eggs and they are fresh, fortune is ready to shower upon you
her richest gifts.  A lofty spirit and high regard for justice will make
you beloved by the world.

To dream of rotten eggs, denotes loss of property and degradation.

To see a crate of eggs, denotes that you will engage
in profitable speculations.

To dream of being spattered with eggs, denotes that you will sport riches
of doubtful origin.

To see bird eggs, signifies legacies from distant relations,
or gain from an unexpected rise in staple products.

_Elbows_.

To see elbows in a dream, signifies that arduous labors will devolve upon you,
and for which you will receive small reimbursements.

For a young woman, this is a prognostic of favorable opportunities
to make a reasonably wealthy marriage.  If the elbows are soiled,
she will lose a good chance of securing a home by marriage.

_Elderberries_.

To dream of seeing elderberries on bushes with their foliage,
denotes domestic bliss and an agreeable county home with resources
for travel and other pleasures.

Elderberries is generally a good dream.

_Election_.

To dream that you are at an election, foretells you will engage
in some controversy which will prove detrimental to your social
or financial standing.

_Electricity_.

To dream of electricity, denotes there will be sudden changes
about you, which will not afford you either advancement or pleasure.
If you are shocked by it you will face a deplorable danger.

To see live electrical wire, foretells that enemies will disturb
your plans, which have given you much anxiety in forming.
To dream that you can send a package or yourself out over a wire
with the same rapidity that a message can be sent, denotes you
will finally overcome obstacles and be able to use your enemies'
plans to advance yourself.

_Elephant_.

To dream of riding an elephant, denotes that you will possess wealth
of the most solid character, and honors which you will wear with dignity.
You will rule absolutely in all lines of your business affairs and your
word will be law in the home.

To see many elephants, denotes tremendous prosperity.  One lone elephant,
signifies you will live in a small but solid way.

To dream of feeding one, denotes that you will elevate yourself in your
community by your kindness to those occupying places below you.

_Elevator_.

To dream of ascending in an elevator, denotes you will swiftly rise
to position and wealth, but if you descend in one your misfortunes
will crush and discourage you.  If you see one go down and think you
are left, you will narrowly escape disappointment in some undertaking.
To see one standing, foretells threatened danger.

_Elixir of Life_.

To dream of the elixir of life, denotes that there will come
into your environments new pleasures and new possibilities.

_Elopement_.

To dream of eloping is unfavorable.  To the married, it denotes
that you hold places which you are unworthy to fill, and if
your ways are not rectified your reputation will be at stake.
To the unmarried, it foretells disappointments in love and
the unfaithfulness of men.

To dream that your lover has eloped with some one else,
denotes his or her unfaithfulness.

To dream of your friend eloping with one whom you do not approve,
denotes that you will soon hear of them contracting a disagreeable marriage.

_Eloquent_.

If you think you are eloquent of speech in your dreams,
there will be pleasant news for you concerning one in whose
interest you are working.

To fail in impressing others with your eloquence, there will be much
disorder in your affairs.

_Embalming_.

To see embalming in process, foretells altered positions in social life
and threatened poverty.  To dream that you are looking at yourself embalmed,
omens unfortunate friendships for you, which will force you into lower
classes than you are accustomed to move in.

_Embankment_.

To dream that you drive along an embankment, foretells you will
be threatened with trouble and unhappiness.  If you continue
your drive without unpleasant incidents arising, you will succeed
in turning these forebodings to useful account in your advancement.
To ride on horseback along one, denotes you will fearlessly meet
and overcome all obstacles in your way to wealth and happiness.
To walk along one, you will have a weary struggle for elevation,
but will &ally; reap a successful reward.

_Embarrassment_.[62]


[62] See Difficulty.

_Embrace_.

To dream of embracing your husband or wife, as the case may be,
in a sorrowing or indifferent way, denotes that you will have dissensions
and accusations in your family, also that sickness is threatened.

To embrace relatives, signifies their sickness and unhappiness.

For lovers to dream of embracing, foretells quarrels and disagreements arising
from infidelity.  If these dreams take place under auspicious conditions,
the reverse may be expected.

If you embrace a stranger, it signifies that you will have an unwelcome guest.

_Embroidery_.

If a woman dreams of embroidering, she will be admired for her tact
and ability to make the best of everything that comes her way.
For a married man to see embroidery, signifies a new member in his household,
For a lover, this denotes a wise and economical wife.

_Emerald_.

To dream of an emerald, you will inherit property concerning
which there will be some trouble with others.

For a lover to see an emerald or emeralds on the person of his affianced,
warns him that he is about to be discarded for some wealthier suitor.

To dream that you buy an emerald, signifies unfortunate dealings.

_Emperor_.

To dream of going abroad and meeting the emperor of a nation
in your travels, denotes that you will make a long journey,
which will bring neither pleasure nor much knowledge.

_Employee_.

To see one of your employees denotes crosses and disturbances
if he assumes a disagreeable or offensive attitude.
If he is pleasant and has communications of interest, you will
find no cause for evil or embarrassing conditions upon waking.

_Employment_.

This is not an auspicious dream.  It implies depression
in business circles and loss of employment to wage earners.
It also denotes bodily illness.

To dream of being out of work, denotes that you will have no fear,
as you are always sought out for your conscientious fulfilment of contracts,
which make you a desired help.

Giving employment to others, indicates loss for yourself.
All dreams of this nature may be interpreted as the above.

_Empress_.

To dream of an empress, denotes that you will be exalted to high honors,
but you will let pride make you very unpopular.

To dream of an empress and an emperor is not particularly bad,
but brings one no substantial good.

_Enchantment_.

To dream of being under the spell of enchantment, denotes that if you
are not careful you will be exposed to some evil in the form of pleasure.
The young should heed the benevolent advice of their elders.

To resist enchantment, foretells that you will be much sought
after for your wise counsels and your liberality.

To dream of trying to enchant others, portends that you will fall into evil.

_Encyclopedia_.

To dream of seeing or searching through encyclopedias, portends that you
will secure literary ability to the losing of prosperity and comfort.

_Enemy_.

To dream that you overcome enemies, denotes that you will surmount
all difficulties in business, and enjoy the greatest prosperity.

If you are defamed by your enemies, it denotes that you will be threatened
with failures in your work.  You will be wise to use the utmost caution
in proceeding in affairs of any moment.

To overcome your enemies in any form, signifies your gain.
For them to get the better of you is ominous of adverse fortunes.
This dream may be literal.

_Engagement_.

To dream of a business engagement, denotes dulness and worries in trade.

For young people to dream that they are engaged, denotes that they
will not be much admired.

To dream of breaking an engagement, denotes a hasty, and an unwise action
in some important matter or disappointments may follow.

_Engine_.

To dream of an engine, denotes you will encounter grave difficulties
and journeys, but you will have substantial friends to uphold you.

Disabled engines stand for misfortune and loss of relatives.

_Engineer_.

To see an engineer, forebodes weary journeys but joyful reunions.

_English_.

To dream, if you are a foreigner, of meeting English people,
denotes that you will have to suffer through the selfish
designs of others.

_Entertainment_.

To dream of an entertainment where there is music and dancing, you will
have pleasant tidings of the absent, and enjoy health and prosperity.
To the young, this is a dream of many and varied pleasures and the high
regard of friends.

_Entrails_.[63]

To dream of the human entrails, denotes horrible misery and despair,
shutting out all hope of happiness.

To dream of the entrails of a wild beast, signifies the overthrow
of your mortal enemy.

To tear the entrails of another, signifies cruel persecutions
to further your own interests.

To dream of your own entrails, the deepest despair will overwhelm you.

To dream of the entrails of your own child, denotes that the child's,
or your own, dissolution is at hand.

[63] See Intestines.

_Envelope_.

Envelopes seen in a dream, omens news of a sorrowful cast.

_Envy_.

To dream that you entertain envy for others, denotes that you will make
warm friends by your unselfish deference to the wishes of others.

If you dream of being envied by others, it denotes that you will suffer
some inconvenience from friends overanxious to please you.

_Epaulet_.

For a man to dream of wearing epaulets, if he is a soldier,
denotes his disfavor for a time, but he will finally wear honors.

For a woman to dream that she is introduced to a person
wearing epaulets, denotes that she will form unwise attachments,
very likely to result in scandal.

_Epicure_.

To dream of sitting at the table with an epicure, denotes that you
will enjoy some fine distinction, but you will be surrounded by people
of selfish principles.

To dream that you an epicure yourself, you will cultivate your mind,
body and taste to the highest polish.

For a woman to dream of trying to satisfy an epicure, signifies that she
will have a distinguished husband, but to her he will be a tyrant.

_Epidemic_.

To dream of an epidemic, signifies prostration of mental faculties and worry
from distasteful tasks.  Contagion among relatives or friends is foretold
by dreams of this nature.

_Ermine_.

To dream that you wear this beautiful and costly raiment, denotes exaltation,
lofty character and wealth forming a barrier to want and misery.

To see others thus clothed, you will be associated with wealthy people,
polished in literature and art.

For a lover to see his sweetheart clothed in ermine,
is an omen of purity and faithfulness.  If the ermine is soiled,
the reverse is indicated.

_Errands_.

To go on errands in your dreams, means congenial associations
and mutual agreement in the home circle.  For a young woman
to send some person on an errand, denotes she will lose her lover
by her indifference to meet his wishes.

_Escape_.

To dream of escape from injury or accidents, is usually favorable.

If you escape from some place of confinement, it signifies your rise
in the world from close application to business.

To escape from any contagion, denotes your good health and prosperity.
If you try to escape and fail, you will suffer from the design of enemies,
who will slander and defraud you.

_Estate_.

To dream that you come into the ownership of a vast estate,
denotes that you will receive a legacy at some distant day, but quite
different to your expectations.  For a young woman, this dream
portends that her inheritance will be of a disappointing nature.
She will have to live quite frugally, as her inheritance will be
a poor man and a house full of children.

_Europe_.

To dream of traveling in Europe, foretells that you will soon
go on a long journey, which will avail you in the knowledge
you gain of the manners and customs of foreign people.
You will also be enabled to forward your financial standing.
For a young woman to feel that she is disappointed with the sights
of Europe, omens her inability to appreciate chances for her elevation.
She will be likely to disappoint her friends or lover.

_Eve_.

To dream of this ancient character, denotes your hesitancy to accept this
ancient story as authentic, and you may encounter opposition in business
and social circles because of this doubt.

For a young woman to dream that she impersonates Eve, warns her
to be careful.  She may be wiser than her ancient relative,
but the Evil One still has powerful agents in the disguise
of a handsome man.  Keep your eye on innocent Eve, young man.
That apple tree still bears fruit, and you may be persuaded,
unwittingly, to share the wealth of its products.

_Evening_.

To dream that evening is about you, denotes unrealized hopes,
and you will make unfortunate ventures.

To see stars shining out clear, denotes present distress,
but brighter fortune is behind your trouble.

For lovers to walk in the evening, denotes separation by the death of one.

_Evergreen_.

This dream denotes boundless resources of wealth, happiness and learning.
It is a free presentiment of prosperity to all classes.

_Exchange_.

Exchange, denotes profitable dealings in all classes of business.
For a young woman to dream that she is exchanging sweethearts with
her friend, indicates that she will do well to heed this as advice,
as she would be happier with another.

_Execution_.

To dream of seeing an execution, signifies that you will suffer
some misfortune from the carelessness of others.

To dream that you are about to be executed, and some miraculous
intervention occurs, denotes that you will overthrow enemies
and succeed in gaining wealth.

_Exile_.[64]

For a woman to dream that she is exiled, denotes that she will have to make
a journey which will interfere with some engagement or pleasure.


[64] See Banishment.


_Explosion_.

To dream of explosions, portends that disapproving actions
of those connected with you will cause you transient displeasure
and loss, and that business will also displease you.
To think your face, or the face of others, is blackened or mutilated,
signifies you will be accused of indiscretion which will be unjust,
though circumstances may convict you.

To see the air filled with smoke and de'bris, denotes unusual dissatisfaction
in business circles and much social antagonism.

To think you are enveloped in the flames, or are up in the air
where you have been blown by an explosion, foretells that unworthy
friends will infringe on your rights and will abuse your confidence.
Young women should be careful of associates of the opposite sex
after a dream of this character.

_Eye_.

To dream of seeing an eye, warns you that watchful enemies are
seeking the slightest chance to work injury to your business.
This dream indicates to a lover, that a rival will usurp him
if he is not careful.

To dream of brown eyes, denotes deceit and perfidy.
To see blue eyes, denotes weakness in carrying out any intention.
To see gray eyes, denotes a love of flattery for the owner.

To dream of losing an eye, or that the eyes are sore, denotes trouble.

To see a one-eyed man, denotes that you will be threatened with loss
and trouble, beside which all others will appear insignificant.

_Eyebrows_.

Eyebrows, denotes that you will encounter sinister obstacles
in your immediate future.

_Eyeglass_.

To dream of seeing or wearing an eyeglass, denotes you will be afflicted
with disagreeable friendships, from which you will strive vainly to
disengage yourself.  For a young woman to see her lover with an eyeglass on,
omens disruption of love affairs.



F.

``_In Gideon the Lord appeared to Solomon in a dream by night_.''--
1st Kings iii, 5.

_Fables_.

To dream of reading or telling fables, denotes pleasant tasks and a literary
turn of mind.  To the young, it signifies romantic attachments.

To hear, or tell, religious fables, denotes that the dreamer
will become very devotional.

_Face_.

This dream is favorable if you see happy and bright faces, but significant
of trouble if they are disfigured, ugly, or frowning on you.

To a young person, an ugly face foretells lovers' quarrels;
or for a lover to see the face of his sweetheart looking old,
denotes separation and the breaking up of happy associations.

To see a strange and weird-looking face, denotes that enemies
and misfortunes surround you.

To dream of seeing your own face, denotes unhappiness; and to the married,
threats of divorce will be made.

To see your face in a mirror, denotes displeasure with yourself
for not being able to carry out plans for self-advancement. You
will also lose the esteem of friends.

_Fagot_.

If you dream of seeing a dense smoke ascending from a pile of fagots,
it denotes that enemies are bearing down upon you, but if the fagots
are burning brightly, you will escape from all unpleasant complications
and enjoy great prosperity.

If you walk on burning fagots, you will be injured by the unwise actions
of friends.  If you succeed in walking on them without being burned,
you will have a miraculous rise in prospects.

To dream of seeing fagots piled up to burn you at the stake,
signifies that you are threatened with loss, but if you escape,
you will enjoy a long and prosperous life.

_Failure_.

For a lover, this is sometimes of contrary significance.
To dream that he fails in his suit, signifies that he only needs
more masterfulness and energy in his daring, as he has already
the love and esteem of his sweetheart.

(Contrary dreams are those in which the dreamer suffers fear,
and not injury.)

For a young woman to dream that her life is going to be a failure,
denotes that she is not applying her opportunities to good advantage.

For a business man to dream that he has made a failure,
forebodes loss and bad management, which should be corrected,
or failure threatens to materialize in earnest.

_Fainting_.

To dream of fainting, signifies illness in your family and unpleasant
news of the absent.

If a young woman dreams of fainting, it denotes that she will fall into ill
health and experience disappointment from her careless way of living.

_Fair_.

To dream of being at a fair, denotes that you will have a pleasant
and profitable business and a congenial companion.

For a young woman, this dream signifies a jovial and even-tempered
man for a life partner.

_Fairy_.

To dream of a fairy, is a favorable omen to all classes, as it is always
a scene with a beautiful face portrayed as a happy child, or woman.

_Faithless_.

To dream that your friends are faithless, denotes that they will hold you
in worthy esteem.  For a lover to dream that his sweetheart is faithless,
signifies a happy marriage.

_Fakir_.

To dream of an Indian fakir, denotes uncommon activity and phenomenal
changes in your life.  Such dreams may sometimes be of gloomy import.

_Falcon_.

To dream of a falcon, denotes that your prosperity will make you
an object of envy and malice.  For a young woman, this dream
denotes that she will be calumniated by a rival.

_Fall_.

To dream that you sustain a fall, and are much frightened,
denotes that you will undergo some great struggle, but will eventually
rise to honor and wealth; but if you are injured in the fall,
you will encounter hardships and loss of friends.

_Fame_.

To dream of being famous, denotes disappointed aspirations.
To dream of famous people, portends your rise from obscurity
to places of honor.

_Famine_.

To dream of a famine, foretells that your business will
be unremunerative and sickness will prove a scourge.
This dream is generally bad.

If you see your enemies perishing by famine, you will be successful
in competition.  If dreams of famine should break in wild confusion
over slumbers, tearing up all heads in anguish, filling every soul with care,
hauling down Hope's banners, somber with omens of misfortune and despair,
your waking grief more poignant still must grow ere you quench ambition
and en{??}y{envy??} overthrow.

_Famish_.

To dream that you are famishing, foretells that you are meeting disheartening
failure in some enterprise which you considered a promising success.
To see others famishing, brings sorrow to others as well as to yourself.

_Family_.

To dream of one's family as harmonious and happy, is significant of
health and easy circumstances; but if there is sickness or contentions,
it forebodes gloom and disappointment.

_Fan_.

To see a fan in your dreams, denotes pleasant news and surprises
are awaiting you in the near future.  For a young woman
to dream of fanning herself, or that some one is fanning her,
gives promise of a new and pleasing acquaintances; if she
loses an old fan, she will find that a warm friend is becoming
interested in other women.

_Farewell_.

To dream of bidding farewell, is not very favorable, as you are likely
to hear unpleasant news of absent friends.

For a young woman to bid her lover farewell, portends his
indifference to her.  If she feels no sadness in this farewell,
she will soon find others to comfort her.

_Farm_.[65]

To dream that you are living on a farm, denotes that you will be fortunate
in all undertakings.

To dream that you are buying a farm, denotes abundant crops to the farmer,
a profitable deal of some kind to the business man, and a safe voyage
to travelers and sailors.

If you are visiting a farm, it signifies pleasant associations.


[65] See Estate.

_Fat_.[66]

To dream that you are getting fat, denotes that you are about to make
a fortunate change in your life.

To see others fat, signifies prosperity.


[66] See Corpulent.

_Fates_.

To dream of the fates, unnecessary disagreements and unhappiness is foretold.
For a young woman to dream of juggling with fate, denotes she will daringly
interpose herself between devoted friends or lovers.

_Father_.

To dream of your father, signifies that you are about to be
involved in a difficulty, and you will need wise counsel if you
extricate yourself therefrom.

If he is dead, it denotes that your business is pulling heavily,
and you will have to use caution in conducting it.

For a young woman to dream of her dead father, portends that her lover will,
or is, playing her false.

_Father-in-law_.

To dream of your father-in-law, denotes contentions
with friends or relatives.  To see him well and cheerful,
foretells pleasant family relations.

_Fatigue_.

To feel fatigued in a dream, foretells ill health or oppression in business.
For a young woman to see others fatigued, indicates discouraging
progress in health.

_Favor_.

To dream that you ask favors of anyone, denotes that you will enjoy abundance,
and that you will not especially need anything.

To grant favors, means a loss.

_Fawn_.[67]

To dream of seeing a fawn, denotes that you will have true
and upright friends.

To the young, it indicates faithfulness in love.

To dream that a person fawns on you, or cajoles you, is a warning
that enemies are about you in the guise of interested friends.


[67] See Deer.

_Fears_.

To dream that you feel fear from any cause, denotes that your future
engagements will not prove so successful as was expected.

For a young woman, this dream forebodes disappointment and unfortunate love.

_Feast_.

To dream of a feast, foretells that pleasant surprises are being
planned for you.  To see disorder or misconduct at a feast,
foretells quarrels or unhappiness through the negligence
or sickness of some person.

To arrive late at a feast, denotes that vexing affairs will occupy you.

_Feather_.

To dream of seeing feathers falling around you, denotes that your burdens
in life will be light and easily borne.

To see eagle feathers, denotes that your aspirations will be realized.

To see chicken feathers, denotes small annoyances.
To dream of buying or selling geese or duck feathers,
denotes thrift and fortune.

To dream of black feathers, denotes disappointments and unhappy amours.

For a woman to dream of seeing ostrich and other ornamental feathers,
denotes that she will advance in society, but her ways of gaining favor
will not bear imitating.

_February_.

To dream of February, denotes continued ill health and gloom, generally.
If you happen to see a bright sunshiny day in this month, you will be
unexpectedly and happily surprised with some good fortune.

_Feeble_.

To dream of being feeble, denotes unhealthy occupation and mental worry.
Seek to make a change for yourself after this dream.

_Feet_.

To dream of seeing your own feet, is omnious{sic} of despair.
You will be overcome by the will and temper of another.
To see others' feet, denotes that you will maintain your rights
in a pleasant, but determined way, and win for yourself a place
above the common walks of life.

To dream that you wash your feet, denotes that you will let others take
advantage of you.

To dream that your feet are hurting you, portends troubles
of a humiliating character, as they usually are family quarrels.

To see your feet swollen and red, you will make a sudden
change in your business by separating from your family.
This is an evil dream, as it usually foretells scandal and sensation.

_Fence_.

To dream of climbing to the top of a fence, denotes that success
will crown your efforts.

To fall from a fence, signifies that you will undertake a project
for which you are incapable, and you will see your efforts
come to naught.

To be seated on a fence with others, and have it fall under you,
denotes an accident in which some person will be badly injured.

To dream that you climb through a fence, signifies that you will use
means not altogether legitimate to reach your desires.

To throw the fence down and walk into the other side, indicates that
you will, by enterprise and energy, overcome the stubbornest barriers
between you and success.

To see stock jumping a fence, if into your enclosure,
you will receive aid from unexpected sources; if out of your lot,
loss in trade and other affairs may follow.

To dream of building a fence, denotes that you are,
by economy and industry, laying a foundation for future wealth.
For a young woman, this dream denotes success in love affairs;
or the reverse, if she dreams of the fence falling, or that she
falls from it.

_Ferns_.

To see ferns in dreams, foretells that pleasant hours will break up
gloomy forebodings.  To see them withered, indicates that much and varied
illness in your family connections will cause you grave unrest.

_Ferry_.

To wait at a ferry for a boat and see the waters swift and muddy, you will
be baffled in your highest wishes and designs by unforeseen circumstances.

To cross a ferry while the water is calm and clear, you will be very lucky
in carrying out your plans, and fortune will crown you.

_Festival_.

To dream of being at a festival, denotes indifference to the cold realities
of life, and a love for those pleasures that make one old before his time.
You will never want, but will be largely dependent on others.

_Fever_.[68]

To dream that you are stricken with this malady, signifies that you are
worrying over trifling affairs while the best of life is slipping past you,
and you should pull yourself into shape and engage in profitable work.

To dream of seeing some of your family sick with fever,
denotes temporary illness for some of them.


[68] See Illness.


_Fiddle_.[69]

To dream of a fiddle, foretells harmony in the home and many
joyful occasions abroad.


[69] See Violin.


_Field_.[70]

To dream of dead corn or stubble fields, indicates to the dreamer
dreary prospects for the future.

To see green fields, or ripe with corn or grain, denotes great abundance
and happiness to all classes.

To see newly plowed fields, denotes early rise in wealth and fortunate
advancement to places of honor.

To see fields freshly harrowed and ready for planting, denotes that you
are soon to benefit by your endeavor and long struggles for success.


[70] See Cornfields and Wheat.


_Fiend_.

To dream that you encounter a fiend, forbodes reckless
living and loose morals.  For a woman, this dream signifies
a blackened reputation.

To dream of a fiend, warns you of attacks to be made on you
by false friends.  If you overcome one, you will be able
to intercept the evil designs of enemies.

_Fife_.

To dream of hearing a fife, denotes that there will be an unexpected call
on you to defend your honor, or that of some person near to you.

To dream that you play one yourself, indicates that whatever
else may be said of you, your reputation will remain intact.
If a woman has this dream, she will have a soldier husband.

_Fight_.

To dream that you engage in a fight, denotes that you will have unpleasant
encounters with your business opponents, and law suits threaten you.

To see fighting, denotes that you are squandering your time and money.
For women, this dream is a warning against slander and gossip.

For a young woman to see her lover fighting, is a sign of his unworthiness.

To dream that you are defeated in a fight, signifies that you
will lose your right to property.

To whip your assailant, denotes that you will, by courage and perseverance,
win honor and wealth in spite of opposition.

To dream that you see two men fighting with pistols, denotes many
worries and perplexities, while no real loss is involved in the dream,
yet but small profit is predicted and some unpleasantness is denoted.

To dream that you are on your way home and negroes attack
you with razors, you will be disappointed in your business,
you will be much vexed with servants, and home associations
will be unpleasant.

To dream that you are fighting negroes, you will be annoyed by them
or by some one of low character.

_Figs_.

Figs, signifies a malarious condition of the system, if you are eating them,
but usually favorable to health and profit if you see them growing.

For a young woman to see figs growing, signifies that she will soon
wed a wealthy and prominent man.

_Figure_.

To dream of figures, indicates great mental distress and wrong.
You will be the loser in a big deal if not careful of your
actions and conversation.

_Filbert_.

This is a favorable dream, denoting a peaceful and harmonious
domestic life and profitable business ventures.

To dream of eating them, signifies to the young, delightful associations
and many true friends.

_File_.

To dream that you see a file, signifies that you will transact
some business which will prove unsatisfactory in the extreme.

To see files, to store away bills and other important papers,
foretells animated discussions over subjects which bear relation to
significant affairs, and which will cause you much unrest and disquiet.
Unfavorable predictions for the future are also implied in this dream.

_Fingers_.

To dream of seeing your fingers soiled or scratched,
with the blood exuding, denotes much trouble and suffering.
You will despair of making your way through life.

To see beautiful hands, with white fingers, denotes that your love will
be requited and that you will become renowned for your benevolence.

To dream that your fingers are cut clean off, you will lose wealth
and a legacy by the intervention of enemies.

_Finger-nails_.

To dream of soiled finger-nails, forbodes disgrace in your family
by the wild escapades of the young.

To see well-kept nails, indicates scholarly tastes and some
literary attainments; also, thrift.

_Fire_.

Fire is favorable to the dreamer if he does not get burned.
It brings continued prosperity to seamen and voyagers,
as well as to those on land.

To dream of seeing your home burning, denotes a loving companion,
obedient children, and careful servants.

For a business man to dream that his store is burning, and he is looking on,
foretells a great rush in business and profitable results.

To dream that he is fighting fire and does not get burned, denotes that
he will be much worked and worried as to the conduct of his business.
To see the ruins of his store after a fire, forebodes ill luck.
He will be almost ready to give up the effort of amassing a handsome
fortune and a brilliant business record as useless, but some unforeseen
good fortune will bear him up again.

If you dream of kindling a fire, you may expect many pleasant surprises.
You will have distant friends to visit.

To see a large conflagration, denotes to sailors a profitable and
safe voyage.  To men of literary affairs, advancement and honors;
to business people, unlimited success.

_Firebrand_.

To dream of a firebrand, denotes favorable fortune, if you are not burned
or distressed by it.

_Fire Budget_.

To dream of a fire budget, denotes disagreement over small matters.

_Fire-engine_.

To see a fire-engine, denotes worry under extraordinary circumstances,
but which will result in good fortune.  To see one broken down,
foretells accident or serious loss For a young woman to ride on one,
denotes she will engage in some unladylike and obnoxious affair.

_Fireman_.

To see a fireman in your dreams, signifies the constancy of your friends.
For a young woman to see a fireman crippled, or meet with an accident
otherwise, implies grave danger is threatening a close friend.

_Fireworks_.

To see fireworks, indicates enjoyment and good health.
For a young woman, this dream signifies entertainments and pleasant
visiting to distant places.

_Firmament_.[71]

To dream of the firmament filled with stars, denotes many crosses and
almost superhuman efforts ere you reach the pinnacle of your ambition.
Beware of the snare of enemies in your work.

To see the firmament illuminated and filled with the heavenly hosts,
denotes great spiritual research, but a final pulling back on Nature
for sustenance and consolation.  You will often be disappointed
in fortune also.

To see people you know in the firmament, signifies that they
are about to commit some unwise act through you, and others
must be the innocent sufferers.  Great disasters usually
follow this dream.


[71] See Illumination.


_Fish_.

To dream that you see fish in clear-water streams, denotes that you
will be favored by the rich and powerful.

Dead fish, signifies the loss of wealth and power through some dire calamity.

For a young woman to dream of seeing fish, portends that she
will have a handsome and talented lover.

To dream of catching a catfish, denotes that you will be embarrassed by evil
designs of enemies, but your luck and presence of mind will tide you safely
over the trouble.

To wade in water, catching fish, denotes that you will possess wealth
acquired by your own ability and enterprise.

To dream of fishing, denotes energy and economy; but if you do not succeed
in catching any, your efforts to obtain honors and wealth will be futile.

Eating fish, denotes warm and lasting attachments.

_Fisherman_.

To dream of a fisherman, denotes you are nearing times of greater
prosperity than you have yet known.

_Fishhooks_.

To dream of fishhooks, denotes that you have opportunities
to make for yourself a fortune and an honorable name if you
rightly apply them.

_Fish Market_.

To visit a fish market in your dream, brings competence and pleasure.

To see decayed fish, foretells distress will come in the guise of happiness.

_Fish-net_.

To dream of a fish-net, portends numerous small pleasures and gains.
A torn one, represents vexatious disappointments.

_Fish-pond_.

To dream of a fish-pond, denotes illness through dissipation,
if muddy.  To see one clear and well stocked with fish,
portends profitable enterprises and extensive pleasures.
To see one empty, proclaims the near approach of deadly enemies.

For a young woman to fall into a clear pond, omens decided good fortune
and reciprocal love.  If muddy, the opposite is foretold.

_Fits_.

To dream of having fits, denotes that you will fall a prey to ill
health and will lose employment.

To see others in this plight, denotes that you will have much unpleasantness
in your circle, caused by quarrels from those under you.

_Flag_.

To dream of your national flag, portends victory if at war,
and if at peace, prosperity.

For a woman to dream of a flag, denotes that she will be ensnared
by a soldier.

To dream of foreign flags, denotes ruptures and breach of confidence
between nations and friends.

To dream of being signaled by a flag, denotes that you should be careful
of your health and name, as both are threatened.

_Flame_.[72]

To dream of fighting flames, foretells that you will have to put forth
your best efforts and energy if you are successful in amassing wealth.


[72] See Fire.

_Flax_.

To see flax in a dream, prosperous enterprises are denoted.

_Flax Spinning_.

Flax spinning, foretells you will be given to industrious and thrifty habits.

_Fleas_.

To dream of fleas, indicates that you will be provoked to anger
and retaliation by the evil machinations of those close to you.

For a woman to dream that fleas bite her, foretells that she will be slandered
by pretended friends.  To see fleas on her lover, denotes inconstancy.

_Fleet_.

To see a large fleet moving rapidly in your dreams, denotes a
hasty change in the business world.  Where dulness oppressed,
brisk workings of commercial wheels will go forward and some
rumors of foreign wars will be heard.

_Flies_.

To dream of flies, denotes sickness and contagious maladies.
Also that enemies surround you.  To a young woman this dream is
significant of unhappiness.  If she kills or exterminates flies,
she will reinstate herself in the love of her intended
by her ingenuity.

_Flight_.

To dream of flight, signifies disgrace and unpleasant news of the absent.

For a young woman to dream of flight, indicates that she has not kept
her character above reproach, and her lover will throw her aside.

To see anything fleeing from you, denotes that you will be victorious
in any contention.

_Floating_.

To dream of floating, denotes that you will victoriously
overcome obstacles which are seemingly overwhelming you.
If the water is muddy your victories will not be gratifying.

_Floods_.[73]

To dream of floods destroying vast areas of country and bearing
you on with its muddy de'bris, denotes sickness, loss in business,
and the most unhappy and unsettled situation in the marriage state.


[73] See Water.

_Flour_.

To dream of flour, denotes a frugal but happy life.
For a young woman to dream that she sees flour on herself,
denotes that she will be ruled by her husband, and that her life
will be full of pleasant cares.

To dream of dealing in flour, denotes hazardous speculations.

_Flower_.[74]

To dream of seeing flowers blooming in gardens, signifies pleasure and gain,
if bright-hued and fresh; white denotes sadness.  Withered and dead flowers,
signify disappointments and gloomy situations.

For a young woman to receive a bouquet of mixed flowers,
foretells that she will have many admirers.

To see flowers blooming in barren soil without vestage
of foliage, foretells you will have some grievous experience,
but your energy and cheerfulness will enable you to climb
through these to prominence and happiness.

          ``Held in slumber's soft embrace,
          She enters realms of flowery grace,
          Where tender love and fond caress,
          Bids her awake to happiness.''


[74] See Bouquet.


_Flute_.

To dream of hearing notes from a flute, signifies a pleasant meeting
with friends from a distance, and profitable engagements.

For a young woman to dream of playing a flute, denotes that she
will fall in love because of her lover's engaging manners.

_Flux_.

To dream of having flux, or thinking that you are thus afflicted,
denotes desperate or fatal illness will overtake you or some member
of your family.  To see others thus afflicted, implies disappointment
in carrying out some enterprise through the neglect of others.
Inharmonious states will vex you.

_Flying_.

To dream of flying high through a space, denotes marital calamities.

To fly low, almost to the ground, indicates sickness and uneasy
states from which the dreamer will recover.

To fly over muddy water, warns you to keep close with your private affairs,
as enemies are watching to enthrall you.

To fly over broken places, signifies ill luck and gloomy surroundings.
If you notice green trees and vegetation below you in flying,
you will suffer temporary embarrassment, but will have a flood
of prosperity upon you.

To dream of seeing the sun while flying, signifies useless worries,
as your affairs will succeed despite your fears of evil.

To dream of flying through the firmament passing the moon and other planets;
foretells famine, wars, and troubles of all kinds.

To dream that you fly with black wings, portends bitter disappointments.
To fall while flying, signifies your downfall.  If you wake while falling,
you will succeed in reinstating yourself.

For a young man to dream that he is flying with white wings above
green foliage, foretells advancement in business, and he will also be
successful in love.  If he dreams this often it is a sign of increasing
prosperity and the fulfilment of desires.  If the trees appear barren
or dead, there will be obstacles to combat in obtaining desires.
He will get along, but his work will bring small results.

For a woman to dream of flying from one city to another,
and alighting on church spires, foretells she will have much to contend
against in the way of false persuasions and declarations of love.
She will be threatened with a disastrous season of ill health,
and the death of some one near to her may follow.

For a young woman to dream that she is shot at while flying,
denotes enemies will endeavor to restrain her advancement
into higher spheres of usefulness and prosperity.

_Flying Machine_.

To dream of seeing a flying machine, foretells that you
will make satisfactory progress in your future speculations.
To see one failing to work, foretells gloomy returns for much
disturbing and worrisome planning.

_Fly-paper_.

To dream of fly-paper, signifies ill health and disrupted friendships.

_Fly-trap_.

To see a fly-trap in a dream, is signal of malicious designing against you.
To see one full of flies, denotes that small embarrassments will ward
off greater ones.

_Foal_.

To dream of a foal, indicates new undertakings in which you
will be rather fortunate.

_Fog_.

To dream of traveling through a dense fog, denotes much
trouble and business worries.  To emerge from it, foretells a
weary journey, but profitable.

For a young woman to dream of being in a fog, denotes that she will be mixed
up in a salacious scandal, but if she gets out of the fog she will prove
her innocence and regain her social standing.

_Foot-log_.[75]

To dream of crossing a clear stream of water on a foot-log,
denotes pleasant employment and profit.  If the water is thick
and muddy, it indicates loss and temporary disturbance.
For a woman this dream indicates either a quarrelsome husband,
or one of mild temper and regular habits, as the water is
muddy or clear.

To fall from a foot-log into clear water, signifies short
widowhood terminating in an agreeable marriage.  If the water
is not clear, gloomy prospects.


[75] See Bridge.

_Forest_.

To dream that you find yourself in a dense forest, denotes loss
in trade, unhappy home influences and quarrels among families.
If you are cold and feel hungry, you will be forced to make a long
journey to settle some unpleasant affair.

To see a forest of stately trees in foliage, denotes
prosperity and pleasures.  To literary people, this dream
foretells fame and much appreciation from the public.
A young lady relates the following dream and its fulfilment:
``I was in a strange forest of what appeared to be
cocoanut trees, with red and yellow berries growing on them.
The ground was covered with blasted leaves, and I could
hear them crackle under my feet as I wandered about lost.
The next afternoon I received a telegram announcing the death
of a dear cousin.''

_Forehead_.

To dream of a fine and smooth forehead, denotes that you will be thought
well of for your judgment and fair dealings.

An ugly forehead, denotes displeasure in your private affairs.

To pass your hand over the forehead of your child, indicates sincere
praises from friends, because of some talent and goodness displayed
by your children.

For a young woman to dream of kissing the forehead of her lover,
signifies that he will be displeased with her for gaining notice
by indiscreet conduct.

_Fork_.

To dream of a fork, denotes that enemies are working for your displacement.
For a woman, this dream denotes unhappy domestic relations,
and separation for lovers.

_Form_.

To see anything ill formed, denotes disappointment.  To have a beautiful form,
denotes favorable conditions to health and business.

_Forsaking_.[76]

For a young woman to dream of forsaking her home or friend,
denotes that she will have troubles in love, as her estimate
of her lover will decrease with acquaintance and association.



[76] See Abandoned and Lover.

_Fort_.

To dream of defending a fort, signifies your honor and possessions
will be attacked, and you will have great worry over the matter.

To dream that you attack a fort and take it, denotes victory
over your worst enemy, and fortunate engagements.

_Fortress_.

To dream that you are confined in a fortress, denotes that enemies
will succeed in placing you in an undesirable situation.

To put others in a fortress, denotes your ability to rule in business
or over women.

_Fortune-telling_.

To dream of telling, or having your fortune told, it dicates that you
are deliberating over some vexed affair, and you should use much
caution in giving consent to its consummation.  For a young woman,
this portends a choice between two rivals.  She will be worried
to find out the standing of one in business and social circles.
To dream that she is engaged to a fortune-teller, denotes that she
has gone through the forest and picked the proverbial stick.
She should be self-reliant, or poverty will attend her marriage.

_Fountain_.

To dream that you see a clear fountain sparkling in the sunlight,
denotes vast possessions, ecstatic delights and many pleasant journeys.

A clouded fountain, denotes the insincerity of associates and unhappy
engagements and love affairs.

A dry and broken fountain, indicates death and cessation of pleasures.

For a young woman to see a sparkling fountain in the moonlight,
signifies ill-advised pleasure which may result in a desertion.

_Fowl_.[77]

To dream of seeing fowls, denotes temporary worry or illness.
For a woman to dream of fowls, indicates a short illness
or disagreement with her friends.


[77] See Chickens.

_Fox_.

To dream of chasing a fox, denotes that you are en gaging in doubtful
speculations and risky love affairs.

If you see a fox slyly coming into your yard, beware of envious friendships;
your reputation is being slyly assailed.

To kill a fox, denotes that you will win in every engagement.

_Fraud_.

To dream that you are defrauding a person, denotes that you will
deceive your employer for gain, indulge in degrading pleasures,
and fall into disrepute.

If you are defrauded, it signifies the useless attempt of enemies
to defame you and cause you loss.

To accuse some one of defrauding you, you will be offered a place
of high honor.

_Freckles_.

For a woman to dream that her face is freckled, denotes that many
displeasing incidents will insinuate themselves into her happiness.
If she sees them in a mirror, she will be in danger of losing her lover
to a rival.

_Friend_.

To dream of friends being well and happy, denotes pleasant tidings of them,
or you will soon see them or some of their relatives.

To see your friend troubled and haggard, sickness or distress
is upon them.

To see your friends dark-colored, denotes unusual sickness or trouble to you
or to them.  To see them take the form of animals, signifies that enemies
will separate you from your closest relations.

To see your friend who dresses in somber colors in flaming red,
foretells that unpleasant things will transpire, causing you
anxiety if not loss, and that friends will be implicated.

To dream you see a friend standing like a statue on a hill, denotes you
will advance beyond present pursuits, but will retain former impressions
of justice and knowledge, seeking these through every change.
If the figure below be low, you will ignore your friends of former
days in your future advancement.  If it is on a plane or level
with you, you will fail in your ambition to reach other spheres.
If you seem to be going from it, you will force yourself to seek
a change in spite of friendly ties or self-admonition.

To dream you see a friend with a white cloth tied over his face,
denotes that you will be injured by some person who will endeavor
to keep up friendly relations with you.

To dream that you are shaking hands with a person who has wronged you,
and he is taking his departure and looks sad, foretells you will have
differences with a close friend and alienation will perhaps follow.
You are most assuredly nearing loss of some character.

_Frightened_.[78]

To dream that you are frightened at anything, denotes temporary
and fleeting worries.


[78] See Affrighted.

_Frogs_.

To dream of catching frogs, denotes carelessness in watching
after your health, which may cause no little distress among
those of your family.

To see frogs in the grass, denotes that you will have a pleasant
and even-tempered friend as your confidant and counselor.

To see a bullfrog, denotes, for a woman, marriage with a wealthy widower,
but there will be children with him to be cared for.

To see frogs in low marshy places, foretells trouble, but you
will overcome it by the kindness of others.

To dream of eating frogs, signifies fleeting joys and very little
gain from associating with some people.

To hear frogs, portends that you will go on a visit to friends,
but it will in the end prove fruitless of good.

_Frost_.

To dream of seeing frost on a dark gloomy morning, signifies exile
to a strange country, but your wanderings will end in peace.

To see frost on a small sunlit landscape, signifies gilded
pleasures from which you will be glad to turn later in life,
and by your exemplary conduct will succeed in making your circle
forget past escapades.

To dream that you see a friend in a frost, denotes a love affair
in which your rival will be worsted.  For a young woman, this dream
signifies the absence of her lover and danger of his affections waning.
This dream is bad for all classes in business and love.

_Fruit_.

To dream of seeing fruit ripening among its foliage,
usually foretells to the dreamer a prosperous future.
Green fruit signifies disappointed efforts or hasty action.

For a young woman to dream of eating green fruit, indicates her degradation
and loss of inheritance.  Eating fruit is unfavorable usually.

To buy or sell fruit, denotes much business, but not very remunerative.

To see or eat ripe fruit, signifies uncertain fortune and pleasure.

_Fruit Seller_.

To dream of a fruit seller, denotes you will endeavor to recover your loss
too rapidly and will engage in unfortunate speculations.

_Funeral_.

To see a funeral, denotes an unhappy marriage and sickly offspring.

To dream of the funeral of a stranger, denotes unexpected worries.
To see the funeral of your child, may denote the health of your family,
but very grave disappointments may follow from a friendly source.

To attend a funeral in black, foretells an early widowhood.
To dream of the funeral of any relative, denotes nervous troubles
and family worries.

_Furnace_.

To dream of a furnace, foretells good luck if it is running.
If out of repair, you will have trouble with children or hired help.
To fall into one, portends some enemy will overpower you in
a business struggle.

_Furs_.

To dream of dealing in furs, denotes prosperity and an interest
in many concerns.

To be dressed in fur, signifies your safety from want and poverty.

To see fine fur, denotes honor and riches.  For a young woman to dream
that she is wearing costly furs, denotes that she will marry a wise man.

_Future_.

To dream of the future, is a prognostic of careful reckoning and avoiding
of detrimental extravagance.



G.

``They answered again and said, `Let the King tell his servants
the dream and we will show the interpretation of it.'
''--Dan.  ii, 7.

_Gaiter_.

To dream of gaiters, foretells pleasant amusements and rivalries.  _Gale_.

To dream of being caught in a gale, signifies business losses
and troubles for working people.

_Gallows_.

To dream of seeing a friend on the gallows of execution,
foretells that desperate emergencies must be met with decision,
or a great calamity will befall you.

To dream that you are on a gallows, denotes that you will suffer
from the maliciousness of false friends.

For a young woman to dream that she sees her lover executed by this means,
denotes that she will marry an unscrupulous and designing man.

If you rescue any one from the gallows, it portends desirable acquisitions.

To dream that you hang an enemy, denotes victory in all spheres.

_Gambling-house_.

To dream that you are gambling and win, signifies low
associations and pleasure at the expense of others.
If you lose, it foretells that your disgraceful conduct will
be the undoing of one near to you.

_Game_.

To dream of game, either shooting or killing or by other means,
denotes fortunate undertakings; but selfish motions; if you fail
to take game on a hunt, it denotes bad management and loss.

_Gangrene_.

To dream that you see any one afflicted with gangrene, foretells the death
of a parent or near relative.

_Gaol_.[79]

If you dream of being confined in a gaol, you will be prevented
from carrying forward some profitable work by the intervention
of envious people; but if you escape from the gaol, you will enjoy
a season of favorable business.


[79] See Jail.

_Garbage_.

To see heaps of garbage in your dreams, indicates thoughts
of social scandal and unfavorable business of every character.
For females this dream is ominous of disparagement and
desertion by lovers.

_Garden_.

To see a garden in your dreams, filled with evergreen and flowers,
denotes great peace of mind and comfort.

To see vegetables, denotes misery or loss of fortune and calumny.
To females, this dream foretells that they will be famous,
or exceedingly happy in domestic circles.

To dream of walking with one's lover through a garden where flowering shrubs
and plants abound, indicates unalloyed happiness and independent means.

_Garlic_.

To dream of passing through a garlic patch, denotes a rise
from penury to prominence and wealth.  To a young woman,
this denotes that she will marry from a sense of business,
and love will not be considered.

To eat garlic in your dreams, denotes that you will take a sensible
view of life and leave its ideals to take care of themselves.

_Garret_.

To dream of climbing to a garret, denotes your inclination
to run after theories while leaving the cold realities
of life to others less able to bear them than yourself.
To the poor, this dream is an omen of easier circumstances.
To a woman, it denotes that her vanity and sefishness{sic}
should be curbed.

_Garter_.

For a lover to find his lady's garter, foretells that he will lose
caste with her.  He will find rivals.

For a woman to dream that she loses her garter, signifies that her lover
will be jealous and suspicious of a handsomer person.

For a married man to dream of a garter, foretells that his wife will hear
of his clandestine attachments, and he will have a stormy scene.

For a woman to dream that she is admiring beautiful jeweled garters on
her limbs, denotes that she will be betrayed in her private movements,
and her reputation will hang in the balance of public opinion.
If she dreams that her lover fastens them on her, she will hold his
affections and faith through all adverse criticisms.

_Gas_.

To dream of gas, denotes you will entertain harmful opinions
of others, which will cause you to deal with them unjustly, and you
will suffer consequent remorse.  To think you are asphyxiated,
denotes you will have trouble which you will needlessly incur
through your own wastefulness and negligence.  To try to blow
gas out, signifies you will entertain enemies unconsciously,
who will destroy you if you are not wary.

To extinguish gas, denotes you will ruthlessly destroy your own happiness.
To light it, you will easily find a way out of oppressive ill fortune.

_Gas Lamps_.

To see a gas lamp, denotes progress and pleasant surroundings.
To see one explode, or out of order other wise, foretells you
are threatened with unseasonable distress.

_Gasoline_.

To dream of gasoline, denotes you have a competency coming to you
through a struggling source.

_Gate_.

To dream of seeing or passing through a gate, foretells that
alarming tidings will reach you soon of the absent.
Business affairs will not be encouraging.

To see a closed gate, inability to overcome present difficulties
is predicted.  To lock one, denotes successful enterprises and well
chosen friends.  A broken one, signifies failure and discordant surroundings.
To be troubled to get through one, or open it, denotes your most
engrossing labors will fail to be remunerative or satisfactory.
To swing on one, foretells you will engage in idle and dissolute pleasures.

_Gauze_.

To dream of being dressed in gauze, denotes uncertain fortune.
For a lover to see his sweetheart clothed in filmy material,
suggests his ability to influence her for good.

_Gavel_.

To dream of a gavel, denotes you will be burdened with some unprofitable yet
not unpleasant pursuit.  To use one, denotes that officiousness will be shown
by you toward your friends.

_Geese_.

To dream that you are annoyed by the quacking of geese,
denotes a death in your family.  To see them swimming,
denotes that your fortune is gradually increasing.

To see them in grassy places, denotes assured success.
If you see them dead, you will suffer loss and displeasure.

For a lover, geese denotes the worthiness of his affianced.

If you are picking them, you will come into an estate.
To eat them, denotes that your possessions are disputed.

Back to Full Books