10,000 Dreams Interpreted [Or. . ."What's In A Dream"] [Or. . .Dreams, Their Scientific and Practical Interpretations]

To dream of a collision, you will meet with an accident of a serious type
and disappointments in business.

For a young woman to see a collision, denotes she will be unable
to decide between lovers, and will be the cause of wrangles.

_Combat_.

To dream of engaging in combat, you will find yourself
seeking to ingratiate your affections into the life and love
of some one whom you know to be another's, and you will run
great risks of losing your good reputation in business.
It denotes struggles to keep on firm ground.

For a young woman to dream of seeing combatants, signifies that she
will have choice between lovers, both of whom love her and would face
death for her.

_Combing_.[41]

To dream of combing one's hair, denotes the illness or death of a friend
or relative.  Decay of friendship and loss of property is also indicated
by this dream{.}


[41] See Hair.

_Comedy_.

To dream of being at a light play, denotes that foolish and short-lived
pleasures will be indulged in by the dreamer.

To dream of seeing a comedy, is significant of light pleasures
and pleasant tasks.

_Comet_.

To dream of this heavenly awe-inspiring object sailing through
the skies, you will have trials of an unexpected nature to beset you,
but by bravely combating these foes you will rise above the mediocre
in life to heights of fame.

For a young person, this dream portends bereavement and sorrow.

_Comic Songs_.

To hear comic songs in dreams, foretells you will disregard opportunity
to advance your affairs and enjoy the companionship of the pleasure loving.
To sing one, proves you will enjoy much pleasure for a time, but difficulties
will overtake you.

_Command_.

To dream of being commanded, denotes that you will be humbled in some way
by your associates for scorn shown your superiors.

To dream of giving a command, you will have some honor conferred upon you.
If this is done in a tyrannical or boastful way disappointments will follow.

_Commandment_.

To dream of receiving commands, foretells you will be unwisely
influenced by persons of stronger will than your own.
To read or hear the Ten Commandments read, denotes you
will fall into errors from which you will hardly escape,
even with the counsels of friends of wise and unerring judgment.

_Commerce_.

To dream that you are engaged in commerce, denotes you
will handle your opportunities wisely and advantageously.
To dream of failures and gloomy outlooks in commercial circles,
denotes trouble and ominous threatening of failure in
real business life.

_Committee_.

To dream of a committee, foretells that you will be surprised
into doing some distasteful work.  For one to wait on you,
foretells some unfruitful labor will be assigned you.

_Companion_.

To dream of seeing a wife or husband, signifies small anxieties
and probable sickness.

To dream of social companions, denotes light and frivolous pastimes
will engage your attention hindering you from performing your duties.

_Compass_.

To dream of a compass, denotes you will be forced to struggle
in narrow limits, thus making elevation more toilsome but
fuller of honor.

To dream of the compass or mariner's needle, foretells you will be surrounded
by prosperous circumstances and honest people will favor you.

To see one pointing awry, foretells threatened loss and deception.

_Completion_.

To dream of completing a task or piece of work, denotes that you
will have acquired a competency early in life, and that you can
spend your days as you like and wherever you please.

For a young woman to dream that she has completed a garment,
denotes that she will soon decide on a husband.

To dream of completing a journey, you will have the means to make
one whenever you like.

_Complexion_.

To dream that you have a beautiful complexion is lucky.
You will pass through pleasing incidents.

To dream that you have bad and dark complexion, denotes
disappointment and sickness.

_Composing_.

To see in your dreams a composing stick, foretells that difficult problems
will disclose themselves, and you will be at great trouble to meet them.

_Concert_.

To dream of a concert of a high musical order, denotes delightful
seasons of pleasure, and literary work to the author.
To the business man it portends successful trade, and to the young
it signifies unalloyed bliss and faithful loves.

Ordinary concerts such as engage ballet singers, denote that
disagreeable companions and ungrateful friends will be met with.
Business will show a falling off.

_Concubine_.

For a man to dream that he is in company with a concubine,
forecasts he is in danger of public disgrace, striving to keep
from the world his true character and state of business.

For a woman to dream that she is a concubine, indicates that she
will degrade herself by her own improprieties.

For a man to dream that his mistress is untrue, denotes that he has
old enemies to encounter.  Expected reverses will arise.

_Confectionary_.

To dream of impure confectionary, denotes that an enemy in the guise
of a friend will enter your privacy and discover secrets of moment
to your opponents.

_Confetti_.

To dream of confetti obstructing your view in a crowd of merry-makers,
denotes that you will lose much by first seeking enjoyment, and later
fulfil tasks set by duty.

_Conjurer_.

To dream of a conjuror, denotes unpleasant experience will beset
you in your search for wealth and happiness.

_Conjuring_.

To dream that you are in a hypnotic state or under the power of others,
portends disastrous results, for your enemies will enthrall you;
but if you hold others under a spell you will assert decided will power
in governing your surroundings.

For a young woman to dream that she is under strange influences,
denotes her immediate exposure to danger, and she should beware.

To dream of seeing hypnotic and slight-of-hand performances,
signifies worries and perplexities in business and domestic circles,
and unhealthy conditions of state.

_Conflagration_.[42]

To dream of a conflagration, denotes, if no lives are lost,
changes in the future which will be beneficial to your
interests and happiness.


[42] See Fire.

_Conspiracy_

To dream that you are the object of a conspiracy, foretells you
will make a wrong move in the directing of your affairs.

_Conscience_.

To dream that your conscience censures you for deceiving some one,
denotes that you will be tempted to commit wrong and should be
constantly on your guard.

To dream of having a quiet conscience, denotes that you will stand
in high repute.

_Consumption_.

To dream that you have consumption, denotes that you are exposing
yourself to danger.  Remain with your friends.

_Contempt_.

To dream of being in contempt of court, denotes that you have committed
business or social indiscretion and that it is unmerited.

To dream that you are held in contempt by others, you will succeed in
winning their highest regard, and will find yourself prosperous and happy.
But if the contempt is merited, your exile from business or social
circles is intimated.

_Convent_.

To dream of seeking refuge in a convent, denotes that
your future will be signally free from care and enemies,
unless on entering the building you encounter a priest.
If so, you will seek often and in vain for relief from worldly
cares and mind worry.

For a young girl to dream of seeing a convent, her virtue and honestly
will be questioned.

_Convicts_.

To dream of seeing convicts, denotes disasters and sad news.
To dream that you are a convict, indicates that you will worry
over some affair; but you will clear up all mistakes.

For a young woman to dream of seeing her lover in the garb of a convict,
indicates she will have cause to question the character of his love.

_Convicted_.[43]


[43] See Accuse.

_Convention_.

To dream of a convention, denotes unusual activity in business affairs
and final engagement in love.  An inharmonious or displeasing convention
brings you disappointment.

_Cooking_.

To cook a meal, denotes some pleasant duty will devolve on you.
Many friends will visit you in the near future.  If there is discord
or a lack of cheerfulness you may expect harassing and disappointing
events to happen.

_Cooking Stove_.

To see a cooking stove in a dream, denotes that much
unpleasantness will be modified by your timely interference.
For a young woman to dream of using a cooking stove, foretells she
will be too hasty in showing her appreciation of the attention
of some person and thereby lose a closer friendship.

_Cooling Board_.

For a young woman to see a cooling board in her dreams,
foretells sickness and quarrels with her lover.  To dream of some
living person as dead and rising up from a cooling board, denotes she
will be indirectly connected with that person in some trouble,
but will find out that things will work out satisfactorily.

To see her brother, who has long since been dead, rising from a cooling board,
warns her of complications which may be averted if she puts forth the proper
will and energy in struggling against them.

_Copper_.

To dream of copper, denotes oppression from those above you in station.

_Copperas_.

To dream of copperas, foretells unintentional wrong will be done
you which will be distressing and will cause you loss.

_Copper Plate_.

Copper plate seen in a dream, is a warning of discordant views
causing unhappiness between members of the same household.

_Coppersmith_.

To dream of a coppersmith, denotes small returns for labor,
but withal contentment.

_Copying_.

To dream of copying, denotes unfavorable workings of well tried plans.

For a young woman to dream that she is copying a letter, denotes she
will be prejudiced into error by her love for a certain class of people.

_Coral_.

To dream of coral, is momentous of enduring friend ship
which will know no weariness in alleviating your trouble.
Colored coral is meant in this dream.

White coral, foretells unfaithfulness and warning of love.

_Cornet_.

A cornet seen or heard in a dream, denotes kindly attentions from strangers.

_Coronation_.

To dream of a coronation, foretells you will enjoy acquaintances
and friendships with prominent people.  For a young woman to be
participating in a coronation, foretells that she will come
into some surprising favor with distinguished personages.
But if the coronation presents disagreeable incoherence in
her dreams, then she may expect unsatisfactory states growing
out of anticipated pleasure.

_Cords_.[44]


[44] See Rope.

_Cork_.

To dream of drawing corks at a banquet, signifies that you will soon
enter a state of prosperity, in which you will revel in happiness
of the most select kind.

To dream of medicine corks, denotes sickness and wasted energies.

To dream of seeing a fishing cork resting on clear water, denotes success.
If water is disturbed you will be annoyed by unprincipled persons.

To dream that you are corking bottles, denotes a well organized
business and system in your living.

For a young woman to dream of drawing champagne corks, indicates she will have
a gay and handsome lover who will lavish much attention and money on her.
She should look well to her reputation and listen to the warning of parents
after this dream.

_Corn_.

To dream of husking pied ears of corn, denotes you will enjoy varied
success and pleasure.  To see others gathering corn, foretells you
will rejoice in the prosperity of friends or relatives.

_Corn and Corn-Field_.

To dream of passing through a green and luxurious corn-field, and seeing
full ears hanging heavily, denotes great wealth for the farmer.
It denotes fine crops and rich harvest and harmony in the home.
To the young it promises much happiness and true friends, but to see
the ears blasted, denotes disappointments and bereavements.

To see young corn newly ploughed, denotes favor with the powerful
and coming success.  To see it ripe, denotes fame and wealth.
To see it cribbed, signifies that your highest desires will be realized.

To see shelled corn, denotes wealthy combines and unstinted favors.

To dream of eating green corn, denotes harmony among friends
and happy unions for the young.

_Corns_.

To dream that your corns hurt your feet, denotes that some
enemies are undermining you, and you will have much distress;
but if you succeed in clearing your feet of corns, you will
inherit a large estate from some unknown source.

For a young woman to dream of having corns on her feet,
indicates she will have to bear many crosses and be coldly
treated by her sex.

_Corkscrew_.

To dream of seeing a corkscrew, indicates an unsatisfied mind,
and the dreamer should heed this as a warning to curb his desires,
for it is likely they are on dangerous grounds.

To dream of breaking a corkscrew while using it, indicates to
the dreamer perilous surroundings, and he should use force
of will to abandon unhealthful inclinations.

_Corpse_.

To dream of a corpse is fatal to happiness, as this dream indicates
sorrowful tidings of the absent, and gloomy business prospects.
The young will suffer many disappointments and pleasure will vanish.

To see a corpse placed in its casket, denotes immediate troubles
to the dreamer.

To see a corpse in black, denotes the violent death of a friend
or some desperate business entanglement.

To see a battle-field strewn with corpses, indicates war and general
dissatisfaction between countries and political factions.

To see the corpse of an animal, denotes unhealthy situation,
both as to business and health.

To see the corpse of any one of your immediate family, indicates death
to that person, or to some member of the family, or a serious
rupture of domestic relations, also unusual business depression.
For lovers it is a sure sign of failure to keep promises of
a sacred nature.

To put money on the eyes of a corpse in your dreams, denotes that you will see
unscrupulous enemies robbing you while you are powerless to resent injury.
If you only put it on one eye you will be able to recover lost property after
an almost hopeless struggle.  For a young woman this dream denotes distress
and loss by unfortunately giving her confidence to designing persons.

For a young woman to dream that the proprietor of the store in
which she works is a corpse, and she sees while sitting up with him
that his face is clean shaven, foretells that she will fall below
the standard of perfection in which she was held by her lover.
If she sees the head of the corpse falling from the body, she is
warned of secret enemies who, in harming her, will also detract
from the interest of her employer.  Seeing the corpse in the store,
foretells that loss and unpleasantness will offset all concerned.
There are those who are not conscientiously doing the right thing.
There will be a gloomy outlook for peace and prosperous work.

_Cornmeal_.

To see cornmeal, foretells the consummation of ardent wishes.
To eat it made into bread, denotes that you will unwittingly
throw obstructions in the way of your own advancement.

_Corner_.

This is an unfavorable dream if the dreamer is frightened and secretes
himself in a corner for safety.

To see persons talking in a corner, enemies are seeking to destroy you.
The chances are that some one whom you consider a friend will prove
a traitor to your interest.

_Corpulence_.

For a person to dream of being corpulent, indicates to the dreamer
bountiful increase of wealth and pleasant abiding places.

To see others corpulent, denotes unusual activity and prosperous times.

If a man or woman sees himself or herself looking grossly corpulent,
he or she should look well to their moral nature and impulses.
Beware of either concave or convex telescopically or microscopically
drawn pictures of yourself or others, as they forbode evil.

_Corset_.

To dream of a corset, denotes that you will be perplexed as to the meaning
of attentions won by you.  If a young woman is vexed over undoing or fastening
her corset, she will be strongly inclined to quarrel with her friends
under slight provocations.

_Cossack_.

To dream of a Cossack, denotes humiliation of a personal character,
brought about by dissipation and wanton extravagance.

_Cot_.

To dream of a cot, foretells some affliction, either through sickness
or accident.  Cots in rows signify you will not be alone in trouble,
as friends will be afflicted also.

_Cotton_.

To dream of young growing cotton-fields, denotes great business
and prosperous times.  To see cotton ready for gathering,
denotes wealth and abundance for farmers.

For manufacturers to dream of cotton, means that they will be
benefited by the advancement of this article.  For merchants,
it denotes a change for the better in their line of business.

To see cotton in bales, is a favorable indication for better times.

To dream that cotton is advancing, denotes an immediate change from low
to high prices, and all will be in better circumstances.

_Cotton Cap_.

It is a good dream, denoting many sincere friends.

_Cotton Cloth_.

To see cotton cloth in a dream, denotes easy circumstances.
No great changes follow this dream.

For a young woman to dream of weaving cotton cloth,
denotes that she will have a thrifty and enterprising husband.
To the married it denotes a pleasant yet a humble abode.

_Cotton Gin_.

To dream of a cotton gin, foretells you will make some advancement
toward fortune which will be very pleasing and satisfactory.
To see a broken or dilapidated gin, signifies misfortune and trouble
will overthrow success.

_Couch_.

To dream of reclining on a couch, indicates that false hopes will
be entertained.  You should be alert to every change of your affairs,
for only in this way will your hopes be realized.

_Cough_.

To dream that you are aggravated by a constant cough indicates
a state of low health; but one from which you will recuperate
if care is observed in your habits.

To dream of hearing others cough, indicates unpleasant surroundings
from which you will ultimately emerge.

_Counter_.

To dream of counters, foretells that active interest will debar
idleness from infecting your life with unhealthful desires.
To dream of empty and soiled counters, foretells unfortunate
engagements which will bring great uneasiness of mind lest
your interest will be wholly swept away.

_Counterfeit Money_.

To dream of counterfeit money, denotes you will have trouble with
some unruly and worthless person.  This dream always omens evil,
whether you receive it or pass it.

_Counselor_.

To dream of a counselor, you are likely to be possessed of some ability
yourself, and you will usually prefer your own judgment to that of others.
Be guarded in executing your ideas of right.

_Countenance_.

To dream of a beautiful and ingenuous countenance, you may safely look
for some pleasure to fall to your lot in the near future; but to behold
an ugly and scowling visage, portends unfavorable transactions.

_Counterpane_.

A counterpane is very good to dream of, if clean and white,
denoting pleasant occupations for women; but if it be soiled
you may expect harassing situations.  Sickness usually
follows this dream.

_Counting_.

To dream of counting your children, and they are merry and sweet-looking,
denotes that you will have no trouble in controlling them, and they will
attain honorable places.

To dream of counting money, you will be lucky and always able to pay
your debts; but to count out money to another person, you will meet with loss
of some kind.  Such will be the case, also, in counting other things.
If for yourself, good; if for others, usually bad luck will attend you.

_Country_.

To dream of being in a beautiful and fertile country, where abound
rich fields of grain and running streams of pure water,
denotes the very acme of good times is at hand.  Wealth will pile
in upon you, and you will be able to reign in state in any country.
If the country be dry and bare, you will see and hear of troublous times.
Famine and sickness will be in the land.

_Courtship_.

Bad, bad, will be the fate of the woman who dreams of being courted.  She will
often think that now he will propose, but often she will be disappointed.
Disappointments will follow illusory hopes and fleeting pleasures.
For a man to dream of courting, implies that he is not worthy of a companion.

_Cousin_.

Dreaming of one's cousin, denotes disappointments and afflictions.
Saddened lives are predicted by this dream.

To dream of an affectionate correspondence with one's cousin,
denotes a fatal rupture between families.

_Cows_.[45]

To dream of seeing cows waiting for the milking hour, promises abundant
fulfilment of hopes and desires.


[45] See Cattle.

_Cowslip_.

To dream of gathering cowslips, portends unhappy ending of seemingly close
and warm friendships; but seeing them growing, denotes a limited competency
for lovers.  This is a sinister dream.

To see them in full bloom, denotes a crisis in your affairs.
The breaking up of happy homes may follow this dream.

_Coxcomb_.

To dream of a coxcomb, denotes a low state of mind.
The dreamer should endeavor to elevate his mind to nobler thoughts.

_Cradle_.

To dream of a cradle, with a beautiful infant occupying it,
portends prosperity and the affections of beautiful children.

To rock your own baby in a cradle, denotes the serious illness
of one of the family.

For a young woman to dream of rocking a cradle is portentous of her downfall.
She should beware of gossiping.

_Crabs_.

To dream of crabs, indicates that you will have many complicated affairs,
for the solving of which you will be forced to exert the soundest judgment.
This dream portends to lovers a long and difficult courtship.

_Crane_.

To dream of seeing a flight of cranes tending northward, indicates gloomy
prospects for business.  To a woman, it is significant of disappointment;
but to see them flying southward, prognosticates a joyful meeting
of absent friends, and that lovers will remain faithful.

To see them fly to the ground, events of unusual moment are at hand.

_Crape_.

To dream of seeing crape hanging from a door, denotes that you
will hear of the sudden death of some relative or friend.

To see a person dressed in crape, indicates that sorrow,
other than death, will possess you.  It is bad for business and trade.
To the young, it implies lovers' disputes and separations.

_Crawfish_.

Deceit is sure to assail you in your affairs of the heart, if you are young,
after dreaming of this backward-going thing.

_Crawl_.

To dream that you are crawling on the ground, and hurt your hand,
you may expect humiliating tasks to be placed on you.

To crawl over rough places and stones, indicates that you
have not taken proper advantage of your opportunities.
A young woman, after dreaming of crawling, if not very careful
of her conduct, will lose the respect of her lover.

To crawl in mire with others, denotes depression in business and loss
of credit.  Your friends will have cause to censure you.

_Cream_.

To dream of seeing cream served, denotes that you will be associated
with wealth if you are engaged in business other than farming.

To the farmer, it indicates fine crops and pleasant family relations.
To drink cream yourself, denotes immediate good fortune.
To lovers, this is a happy omen, as they will soon be united.

_Credit_.

To dream of asking for credit, denotes that you will have cause to worry,
although you may be inclined sometimes to think things look bright.

To credit another, warns you to be careful of your affairs,
as you are likely to trust those who will eventually work you harm.

_Creek_.

To dream of a creek, denotes new experiences and short journeys.
If it is overflowing, you will have sharp trouble, but of brief period.

If it is dry, disappointment will be felt by you, and you will see
another obtain the things you intrigued to secure.

_Cremate_.

To dream of seeing bodies cremated, denotes enemies will reduce
your influence in business circles.  To think you are being cremated,
portends distinct failure in enterprises, if you mind any but your own
judgment in conducting them.

_Crew_.

To dream of seeing a crew getting ready to leave port,
some unforseen{sic} circumstance will cause you to give up
a journey from which you would have gained much.

To see a crew working to save a ship in a storm, denotes disaster
on land and sea.  To the young, this dream bodes evil.

_Cricket_.

To hear a cricket in one's dream, indicates melancholy news,
and perhaps the death of some distant friend.

To see them, indicates hard struggles with poverty.

_Cries_.

To hear cries of distress, denotes that you will be engulfed
in serious troubles, but by being alert you will finally emerge
from these distressing straits and gain by this temporary gloom.

To hear a cry of surprise, you will receive aid from unexpected sources.

To hear the cries of wild beasts, denotes an accident of a serious nature.

To hear a cry for help from relatives, or friends, denotes that they
are sick or in distress.

_Criminal_.

To dream of associating with a person who has committed a crime,
denotes that you will be harassed with unscrupulous persons,
who will try to use your friendship for their own advancement.

To see a criminal fleeing from justice, denotes that you will come
into the possession of the secrets of others, and will therefore
be in danger, for they will fear that you will betray them,
and consequently will seek your removal.

_Crippled_.

To dream of the maimed and crippled, denotes famine and distress among
the poor, and you should be willing to contribute to their store.
It also indicates a temporary dulness in trade.

_Crochet Work_.

To dream of doing crochet work, foretells your entanglement in some silly
affair growing out of a too great curiosity about other people's business.
Beware of talking too frankly with over-confidential women.

_Crockery_.

To dream of having an abundance of nice, clean crockery,
denotes that you will be a tidy and economical housekeeper.

To be in a crockery store, indicates, if you are a merchant
or business man, that you will look well to the details of your
business and thereby experience profit.  To a young woman,
this dream denotes that she will marry a sturdy and upright man.
An untidy store, with empty shelves, implies loss.

_Crocodile_.

As sure as you dream of this creature, you will be deceived by your
warmest friends.  Enemies will assail you at every turn.

To dream of stepping on a crocodile's back, you may expect to fall into
trouble, from which you will have to struggle mightily to extricate yourself.
Heed this warning when dreams of this nature visit you.  Avoid giving your
confidence even to friends.

_Cross_.

To dream of seeing a cross, indicates trouble ahead for you.
Shape your affairs accordingly.

To dream of seeing a person bearing a cross, you will be called
on by missionaries to aid in charities.

_Cross-bones_.

To dream of cross-bones, foretells you will be troubled by the evil influence
of others, and prosperity will assume other than promising aspects.

To see cross-bones as a monogram on an invitation to a funeral,
which was sent out by a secret order, denotes that unnecessary fears
will be entertained for some person, and events will transpire
seemingly harsh, but of good import to the dreamer.

_Cross Roads_.

To dream of cross roads, denotes you will be unable to hold
some former favorable opportunity for reaching your desires.
If you are undecided which one to take, you are likely to let
unimportant matters irritate you in a distressing manner.
You will be better favored by fortune if you decide on your route.
It may be after this dream you will have some important matter
of business or love to decide.

_Croup_.

To dream that your child has the croup, denotes slight illness,
but useless fear for its safety.  This is generally a good omen
of health and domestic harmony.

_Crow_.[46]

To dream of seeing a crow, betokens misfortune and grief.
To hear crows cawing, you will be influenced by others to make
a bad disposal of property.  To a young man, it is indicative
of his succumbing to the wiles of designing women.


[46] See Raven.

_Crowd_.

To dream of a large, handsomely dressed crowd of people at
some entertainment, denotes pleasant association with friends;
but anything occurring to mar the pleasure of the guests,
denotes distress and loss of friendship, and unhappiness will
be found where profit and congenial intercourse was expected.
It also denotes dissatisfaction in government and family dissensions.

To see a crowd in a church, denotes that a death will be likely to affect you,
or some slight unpleasantness may develop.

To see a crowd in the street, indicates unusual briskness in trade
and a general air of prosperity will surround you.

To try to be heard in a crowd, foretells that you will push your interests
ahead of all others.

To see a crowd is usually good, if too many are not wearing black
or dull costumes.

To dream of seeing a hypnotist trying to hypnotize others, and then
turn his attention on you, and fail to do so, indicates that a trouble
is hanging above you which friends will not succeed in warding off.
Yourself alone can avert the impending danger.

_Crown_.

To dream of a crown, prognosticates change of mode in the habit
of one's life.  The dreamer will travel a long distance from home
and form new relations.  Fatal illness may also be the sad omen
of this dream.

To dream that you wear a crown, signifies loss of personal property.

To dream of crowning a person, denotes your own worthiness.

To dream of talking with the President of the United States,
denotes that you are interested in affairs of state, and sometimes
show a great longing to be a politician.

_Crucifixion_.

If you chance to dream of the crucifixion, you will see your
opportunities slip away, tearing your hopes from your grasp,
and leaving you wailing over the frustration of desires.

_Crucifix_.

To see a crucifix in a dream, is a warning of distress approaching,
which will involve others beside yourself.  To kiss one,
foretells that trouble will be accepted by you with resignation.

For a young woman to possess one, foretells she will observe
modesty and kindness in her deportment, and thus win the love
of others and better her fortune.

_Cruelty_.

To dream of cruelty being shown you, foretells you will have trouble
and disappointment in some dealings.  If it is shown to others,
there will be a disagreeable task set for others by you,
which will contribute to you own loss.

_Crust_.

To dream of a crust of bread, denotes incompetency, and threatened misery
through carelessness in appointed duties.

_Crutches_.

To dream that you go on crutches, denotes that you will depend
largely on others for your support and advancement.

To see others on crutches, denotes unsatisfactory results from labors.

_Crying_.

To dream of crying, is a forerunner of illusory pleasures,
which will subside into gloom, and distressing influences
affecting for evil business engagements and domestic affairs.

To see others crying, forbodes unexpected calls for aid from you.

_Crystal_.

To dream of crystal in any form, is a fatal sign of coming
depression either in social relations or business transactions.
Electrical storms often attend this dream, doing damage
to town and country.

For a woman to dream of seeing a dining-room furnished in crystal,
even to the chairs, she will have cause to believe that those whom
she holds in high regard no longer deserve this distinction, but she
will find out that there were others in the crystal-furnished room,
who were implicated also in this sinister dream.

_Cuckoo_.

To dream of a cuckoo, prognosticates a sudden ending of a happy
life caused by the downfall of a dear friend.

To dream that you hear a cuckoo, denotes the painful illness of the death
of some absent loved one, or accident to some one in your family.

_Cucumber_.

This is a dream of plenty, denoting health and prosperity.
For the sick to dream of serving cucumbers, denotes their speedy recovery.
For the married, a pleasant change.

_Cunning_.

To dream of being cunning, denotes you will assume happy
cheerfulness to retain the friendship of prosperous and gay people.
If you are associating with cunning people, it warns you that
deceit is being practised upon you in order to use your means
for their own advancement.

_Cupboard_.[47]

To see a cupboard in your dream, is significant of pleasure and comfort,
or penury and distress, according as the cupboard is clean and full
of shining ware, or empty and dirty.


[47] See Safe.

_Curbstone_.

To dream of stepping on a curbstone, denotes your rapid rise
in business circles, and that you will be held in high esteem
by your friends and the public.

For lovers to dream of stepping together on a curb, denotes an early
marriage and consequent fidelity; but if in your dream you step or fall
from a curbstone your fortunes will be reversed.

_Currycomb_.

To dream of a currycomb foretells that great labors must be endured
in order to obtain wealth and comfort.

_Currying a Horse_.

To dream of currying a horse, signifies that you will have a great many hard
licks to make both with brain and hand before you attain to the heights of
your ambition; but if you successfully curry him you will attain that height,
whatever it may be.

_Curtains_.

To dream of curtains, foretells that unwelcome visitors will cause
you worry and unhappiness.  Soiled or torn curtains seen in a dream
means disgraceful quarrels and reproaches.

_Cushion_.

To dream of reclining on silken cushions, foretells that your ease
will be procured at the expense of others; but to see the cushions,
denotes that you will prosper in business and love-making.

For a young woman to dream of making silken cushions, implies that she
will be a bride before many months.

_Cuspidor_.

To see a cuspidor in a dream, signifies that an unworthy attachment
will be formed by you, and that your work will be neglected.

To spit in one, foretells that reflections wil{sic} be cast
upon your conduct.

_Custard_.[48]

For a married woman to dream of making or eating custard,
indicates she will be called upon to entertain an unexpected guest.
A young woman will meet a stranger who will in time become a warm friend.
If the custard has a sickening sweet taste, or is insipid, nothing but
sorrow will intervene where you had expected a pleasant experience.


[48] See Baking.

_Custom-house_.

To dream of a custom-house, denotes you will have rivalries and competition
in your labors.

To enter a custom-house, foretells that you will strive for,
or have offered you, a position which you have long desired.

To leave one, signifies loss of position, trade or failure of securing
some desired object.

_Cut_.

To dream of a cut, denotes sickness or the treachery of a friend
will frustrate your cheerfulness.

_Cymbal_.

Hearing a cymbal in your dreams, foretells the death of a very aged
person of your acquaintance.  The sun will shine, but you will see
it darkly because of gloom.



D.

``_God came to Laban, the Syrian, by night, in a dream, and said unto him,
take heed that thou speak not to Jacob, either good or bad_.''--
Gen. xxxi., 24.

_Dagger_.

If seen in a dream, denotes threatening enemies.  If you wrench the dagger
from the hand of another, it denotes that you will be able to counteract
the influence of your enemies and overcome misfortune.

_Dahlia_.[49]

To see dahlias in a dream, if they are fresh and bright,
signifies good fortune to the dreamer.


[49] See Bouquet

_Dairy_.[50]

Dairy is a good dream both to the married and unmarried.

[50] See Churning Butter.

_Daisy_.

To dream of a bunch of daisys, implies sadness, but if you dream
of being in a field where these lovely flowers are in bloom,
with the sun shining and birds singing, happiness, health and
prosperity will vie each with the other to lead you through
the pleasantest avenues of life.

To dream of seeing them out of season, you will be assailed by evil
in some guise.

_Damask Rose_.

To dream of seeing a damask rosebush in full foliage and bloom,
denotes that a wedding will soon take place in your family,
and great hopes will be fulfilled.

For a lover to place this rose in your hair, foretells that you will
be deceived.  If a woman receives a bouquet of damask roses in springtime,
she will have a faithful lover; but if she received them in winter,
she will cherish blasted hopes.

_Damson_.

This is a peculiarly good dream if one is so fortunate as to see these trees
lifting their branches loaded with rich purple fruit and dainty foliage;
one may expect riches compared with his present estate.

To dream of eating them at any time, forebodes grief.

_Dance_.[51]

To dream of seeing a crowd of merry children dancing,
signifies to the married, loving, obedient and intelligent
children and a cheerful and comfortable home.  To young people,
it denotes easy tasks and many pleasures.

To see older people dancing, denotes a brighter outlook for business.

To dream of dancing yourself, some unexpected good fortune will come to you.


[51] See Ball.

_Dancing Master_.

To dream of a dancing master, foretells you will neglect important
affairs to pursue frivolities.  For a young woman to dream that her
lover is a dancing master, portends that she will have a friend
in accordance with her views of pleasure and life.

_Dandelion_.

Dandelions blossoming in green foliage, foretells happy unions
and prosperous surroundings.

_Danger_.

To dream of being in a perilous situation, and death seems
iminent,{sic} denotes that you will emerge from obscurity into
places of distinction and honor; but if you should not escape
the impending danger, and suffer death or a wound, you will
lose in business and be annoyed in your home, and by others.
If you are in love, your prospects will grow discouraging.

_Dark_.

To dream of darkness overtaking you on a journey, augurs ill for any work
you may attempt, unless the sun breaks through before the journey ends,
then faults will be overcome.

To lose your friend, or child, in the darkness, portends many provocations
to wrath.  Try to remain under control after dreaming of darkness,
for trials in business and love will beset you.

_Dates_.

To dream of seeing them on their parent trees, signifies prosperity
and happy union; but to eat them as prepared for commerce,
they are omens of want and distress.

_Daughter_.

To dream of your daughter, signifies that many displeasing incidents will give
way to pleasure and harmony.  If in the dream, she fails to meet your wishes,
through any cause, you will suffer vexation and discontent.

_Daughter-in-law_.

To dream of your daughter-in-law, indicates some unusual occurence{sic} will
add to happiness, or disquiet, according as she is pleasant or unreasonable.

_David_.

To dream of David, of Bible fame, denotes divisions in domestic circles,
and unsettled affairs, will tax heavily your nerve force.

_Day_.

To dream of the day, denotes improvement in your situation,
and pleasant associations.  A gloomy or cloudy day, foretells loss
and ill success in new enterprises.

_Daybreak_.

To watch the day break in a dream, omens successful undertakings,
unless the scene is indistinct and weird; then it may imply
disappointment when success in business or love seems assured.

_Dead_.[52]

To dream of the dead, is usually a dream of warning.  If you see and talk
with your father, some unlucky transaction is about to be made by you.
Be careful how you enter into contracts, enemies are around you.
Men and women are warned to look to their reputations after this dream.

To see your mother, warns you to control your inclination to
cultivate morbidness and ill will towards your fellow creatures.
A brother, or other relatives or friends, denotes that you
may be called on for charity or aid within a short time.

To dream of seeing the dead, living and happy, signifies you are letting wrong
influences into your life, which will bring material loss if not corrected
by the assumption of your own will force.

To dream that you are conversing with a dead relative, and that
relative endeavors to extract a promise from you, warns you
of coming distress, unless you follow the advice given you.
Disastrous consequences could often be averted if minds could grasp
the inner workings and sight of the higher or spiritual self.
The voice of relatives is only that higher self taking form to approach
more distinctly the mind that lives near the material plane.
There is so little congeniality between common or material natures
that persons should depend upon their own subjectivity for true
contentment and pleasure.


[52] Paracelsus says on this subject:  ``It may happen that the soul of
persons who have died perhaps fifty years ago may appear to us in a dream,
and if it speaks to us we should pay special attention to what it says,
for such a vision is not an illusion or delusion, and it is possible
that a man is as much able to use his reason during the sleep of his body
as when the latter is awake; and if in such a case such a soul appears
to him and he asks questions, he will then hear that which is true.
Through these solicitous souls we may obtain a great deal of knowledge
to good or to evil things if we ask them to reveal them to us.
Many persons have had such prayers granted to them.  Some people that were
sick have been informed during their sleep what remedies they should use,
and after using the remedies, they became cured, and such things have
happened not only to Christians, but also to Jews, Persians, and heathens,
to good and to bad persons.''

The writer does not hold that such knowledge is obtained from external
or excarnate spirits, but rather through the personal _Spirit Glimpses_
that is in man.--AUTHOR.


_Death_.[53]

To dream of seeing any of your people dead, warns you of coming dissolution
or sorrow.  Disappointments always follow dreams of this nature.

To hear of any friend or relative being dead, you will soon have bad news
from some of them.

Dreams relating to death or dying, unless they are due
to spiritual causes, are misleading and very confusing to
the novice in dream lore when he attempts to interpret them.
A man who thinks intensely fills his aura with thought or
subjective images active with the passions that gave them birth;
by thinking and acting on other lines, he may supplant these
images with others possessed of a different form and nature.
In his dreams he may see these images dying, dead or
their burial, and mistake them for friends or enemies.
In this way he may, while asleep, see himself or a relative die,
when in reality he has been warned that some good thought
or deed is to be supplanted by an evil one.  To illustrate:
If it is a dear friend or relative whom he sees in the agony
of death, he is warned against immoral or other improper thought
and action, but if it is an enemy or some repulsive object
dismantled in death, he may overcome his evil ways and thus give
himself or friends cause for joy.  Often the end or beginning
of suspense or trials are foretold by dreams of this nature.
They also frequently occur when the dreamer is controlled by imaginary
states of evil or good.  A man in that state is not himself,
but is what the dominating influences make him.  He may be warned
of approaching conditions or his extrication from the same.
In our dreams we are closer to our real self than in waking life.
The hideous or pleasing incidents seen and heard about us in our
dreams are all of our own making, they reflect the true state
of our soul and body, and we cannot flee from them unless we drive
them out of our being by the use of good thoughts and deeds,
by the power of the spirit within us.

[53] See Corpse.

_Debt_.

Debt is rather a bad dream, foretelling worries in business and love,
and struggles for a competency; but if you have plenty to meet all
your obligations, your affairs will assume a favorable turn.

_December_.

To dream of December, foretells accumulation of wealth, but loss
of friendship.  Strangers will occupy the position in the affections
of some friend which was formerly held by you.

_Deck_.[54]

To dream of being on a ship and that a storm is raging,
great disasters and unfortunate alliances will overtake you;
but if the sea is calm and the light distinct, your way is clear
to success.  For lovers, this dream augurs happiness.

[54] See Boat.

_Decorate_.

To dream of decorating a place with bright-hued flowers
for some festive occasion, is significant of favorable turns
in business, and, to the young, of continued rounds of social
pleasures and fruitful study.

To see the graves or caskets of the dead decorated with white flowers,
is unfavorable to pleasure and worldly pursuits.

To be decorating, or see others decorate for some heroic action,
foretells that you will be worthy, but that few will recognize your ability.

_Deed_.[55]

To dream of seeing or signing deeds, portends a law suit,
to gain which you should be careful in selecting your counsel,
as you are likely to be the loser.  To dream of signing any kind
of a paper, is a bad omen for the dreamer.


[55] See Mortgage.

_Deer_.

This is a favorable dream, denoting pure and deep friendships
for the young and a quiet and even life for the married.

To kill a deer, denotes that you will be hounded by enemies.
For farmers, or business people, to dream of hunting deer,
denotes failure in their respective pursuits.

_Delay_.

To be delayed in a dream, warns you of the scheming of enemies
to prevent your progress.

_Delight_.

To dream of experiencing delight over any event, signifies a favorable turn
in affairs.  For lovers to be delighted with the conduct of their sweethearts,
denotes pleasant greetings.

To feel delight when looking on beautiful landscapes, prognosticates to
the dreamer very great success and congenial associations.

_Demand_.

To dream that a demand for charity comes in upon you,
denotes that you will be placed in embarrassing situations,
but by your persistency you will fully restore your good standing.
If the demand is unjust, you will become a leader in your profession.
For a lover to command you adversely, implies his, or her, leniency.

_Dentist_.

To dream of a dentist working on your teeth, denotes that you
will have occasion to doubt the sincerity and honor of some person
with whom you have dealings.

To see him at work on a young woman's teeth, denotes that you
will soon be shocked by a scandal in circles near you.

_Derrick_.

Derricks seen in a dream, indicate strife and obstruction in your
way to success.

_Desert_.

To dream of wandering through a gloomy and barren desert, denotes famine
and uprisal of races and great loss of life and property.

For a young woman to find herself alone in a desert, her health
and reputation is being jeopardized by her indiscretion.
She should be more cautious.

_Desk_.

To be using a desk in a dream, denotes unforeseen ill luck
will rise before you.  To see money on your desk, brings you
unexpected extrication from private difficulties.

_Despair_.

To be in despair in dreams, denotes that you will have many and cruel
vexations in the working world.

To see others in despair, foretells the distress and unhappy position
of some relative or friend.

_Detective_.

To dream of a detective keeping in your wake when you are innocent
of charges preferred, denotes that fortune and honor are drawing nearer
to you each day; but if you feel yourself guilty, you are likely
to find your reputation at stake, and friends will turn from you.
For a young woman, this is not a fortunate dream.

_Devotion_.

For a farmer to dream of showing his devotion to God, or to
his family, denotes plenteous crops and peaceful neighbors.
To business people, this is a warning that nothing is to be
gained by deceit.

For a young woman to dream of being devout, implies her chastity
and an adoring husband.

_Devil_.

For farmers to dream of the devil, denotes blasted crops and death
among stock, also family sickness.  Sporting people should heed
this dream as a warning to be careful of their affairs, as they are
likely to venture beyond the laws of their State.  For a preacher,
this dream is undeniable proof that he is over-zealous, and should
forebear worshiping God by tongue-lashing his neighbor.

To dream of the devil as being a large, imposingly dressed person,
wearing many sparkling jewels on his body and hands, trying to
persuade you to enter his abode, warns you that unscrupulous
persons are seeking your ruin by the most ingenious flattery.
Young and innocent women, should seek the stronghold of friends after
this dream, and avoid strange attentions, especially from married men.
Women of low character, are likely to be robbed of jewels and money
by seeming strangers.

Beware of associating with the devil, even in dreams.  He is always
the forerunner of despair.  If you dream of being pursued by his majesty,
you will fall into snares set for you by enemies in the guise of friends.
To a lover, this denotes that he will be won away from his allegiance
by a wanton.

_Dew_.

To feel the dew falling on you in your dreams, portends that
you will be attacked by fever or some malignant disease;
but to see the dew sparkling through the grass in the sunlight,
great honors and wealth are about to be heaped upon you.
If you are single, a wealthy marriage will soon be your portion.

_Diadem_.

To dream of a diadem, denotes that some honor will be tendered
you for acceptance.

_Diamonds_.

To dream of owning diamonds is a very propitious dream,
signifying great honor and recognition from high places.

For a young woman to dream of her lover presenting her with diamonds,
foreshows that she will make a great and honorable marriage, which will fill
her people with honest pride; but to lose diamonds, and not find them again,
is the most unlucky of dreams, foretelling disgrace, want and death.

For a sporting woman to dream of diamonds, foretells for
her many prosperous days and magnificent presents.
For a speculator, it denotes prosperous transactions.
To dream of owning diamonds, portends the same for sporting
men or women.

Diamonds are omens of good luck, unless stolen from the bodies
of dead persons, when they foretell that your own unfaithfulness
will be discovered by your friends.

_Dice_.

To dream of dice, is indicative of unfortunate speculations, and consequent
misery and despair.  It also foretells contagious sickness.

For a girl to dream that she sees her lover throwing dice,
indicates his unworthiness.

_Dictionary_.

To dream that you are referring to a dictionary, signifies you
will depend too much upon the opinion and suggestions of others
for the clear management of your own affairs, which could be done
with proper dispatch if your own will was given play.

_Difficulty_.

This dream signifies temporary embarrassment for business men of all classes,
including soldiers and writers.  But to extricate yourself from difficulties,
foretells your prosperity.

For a woman to dream of being in difficulties, denotes that she is threatened
with ill health or enemies.  For lovers, this is a dream of contrariety,
denoting pleasant courtship.

_Digging_.

To dream of digging, denotes that you will never be in want,
but life will be an uphill affair.

To dig a hole and find any glittering substance, denotes a favorable turn
in fortune; but to dig and open up a vast area of hollow mist, you will be
harrassed with real misfortunes and be filled with gloomy forebodings.
Water filling the hole that you dig, denotes that in spite of your most
strenuous efforts things will not bend to your will.

_Dinner_.

To dream that you eat your dinner alone, denotes that you will often
have cause to think seriously of the necessaries of life.

For a young woman to dream of taking dinner with her lover,
is indicative of a lovers' quarrel or a rupture, unless the affair
is one of harmonious pleasure, when the reverse may be expected.

To be one of many invited guests at a dinner, denotes that you
will enjoy the hospitalities of those who are able to extend
to you many pleasant courtesies.

_Dirt_.

To dream of seeing freshly stirred dirt around flowers or trees,
denotes thrift and healthful conditions abound for the dreamer.

To see your clothes soiled with unclean dirt, you will be forced
to save yourself from contagious diseases by leaving your home
or submitting to the strictures of the law.

To dream that some one throws dirt upon you, denotes that enemies
will try to injure your character.

_Disaster_.

To dream of being in any disaster from public conveyance,
you are in danger of losing property or of being maimed from
some malarious disease.

For a young woman to dream of a disaster in which she is a participant,
foretells that she will mourn the loss of her lover by death or desertion.

To dream of a disaster at sea, denotes unhappiness to sailors
and loss of their gains.  To others, it signifies loss by death;
but if you dream that you are rescued, you will be placed
in trying situations, but will come out unscathed.

To dream of a railway wreck in which you are not a participant,
you will eventually be interested in some accident because of
some relative or friend being hurt, or you will have trouble
of a business character.

_Disease_.

To dream that you are diseased, denotes a slight attack of illness,
or of unpleasant dealings with a relative.

For a young woman to dream that she is incurably diseased, denotes that she
will be likely to lead a life of single blessedness.

_Disgrace_.

To be worried in your dream over the disgraceful conduct of children
or friends, will bring you unsatisfying hopes, and worries will harass you.
To be in disgrace yourself, denotes that you will hold morality at a low rate,
and you are in danger of lowering your reputation for uprightness.
Enemies are also shadowing you.

_Dish_.[56]

To dream of handling dishes, denotes good fortune; but if from any cause they
should be broken, this signifies that fortune will be short-lived for you.

To see shelves of polished dishes, denotes success in marriage.

To dream of dishes, is prognostic of coming success and gain,
and you will be able to fully appreciate your good luck.
Soiled dishes, represent dissatisfaction and an unpromising future.

[56] See Crockery

_Disinherited_.

To dream that you are disinherited, warns you to look well to your business
and social standing.

For a young man to dream of losing his inheritance by disobedience,
warns him that he will find favor in the eyes of his parents by contracting
a suitable marriage.  For a woman, this dream is a warning to be careful
of her conduct, lest she meet with unfavorable fortune.

_Dispute_.

To dream of holding disputes over trifles, indicates bad health
and unfairness in judging others.

To dream of disputing with learned people, shows that you have some
latent ability, but are a little sluggish in developing it.

_Distaff_.

To dream of a distaff, denotes frugality, with pleasant surroundings.
It also signifies that a devotional spirit will be cultivated by you.

_Distance_.

To dream of being a long way from your residence, denotes that you will make
a journey soon in which you may meet many strangers who will be instrumental
in changing life from good to bad.

To dream of friends at a distance, denotes slight disappointments.

To dream of distance, signifies travel and a long journey.
To see men plowing with oxen at a distance, across broad fields,
denotes advancing prosperity and honor.  For a man to see strange
women in the twilight, at a distance, and throwing kisses to him,
foretells that he will enter into an engagement with a new acquaintance,
which will result in unhappy exposures.

_Ditch_.

To dream of falling in a ditch, denotes degradation and personal loss;
but if you jump over it, you will live down any suspicion of wrong-doing.

_Diving_.

To dream of diving in clear water, denotes a favorable termination
of some embarrassment.  If the water is muddy, you will suffer
anxiety at the turn your affairs seem to be taking.

To see others diving, indicates pleasant companions.
For lovers to dream of diving, denotes the consummation of happy
dreams and passionate love.

_Dividend_.

To dream of dividends, augments successful speculations or
prosperous harvests.  To fail in securing hoped-for dividends,
proclaims failure in management or love affairs.

_Divining Rods_.

To see a divining rod in your dreams, foretells ill luck will dissatisfy
you with present surroundings.

_Divorce_.

To dream of being divorced, denotes that you are not satisfied with your
companion, and should cultivate a more congenial atmosphere in the home life.
It is a dream of warning.

For women to dream of divorce, denotes that a single life may be theirs
through the infidelity of lovers.

_Docks_.

To dream of being on docks, denotes that you are about to make
an unpropitious journey.  Accidents will threaten you.
If you are there, wandering alone, and darkness overtakes you,
you will meet with deadly enemies, but if the sun be shining,
you will escape threatening dangers.

_Doctor_.

This is a most auspicious dream, denoting good health and general prosperity,
if you meet him socially, for you will not then spend your money for
his services.  If you be young and engaged to marry him, then this dream
warns you of deceit.

To dream of a doctor professionally, signifies discouraging illness
and disagreeable differences between members of a family.

To dream that a doctor makes an incision in your flesh,
trying to discover blood, but failing in his efforts,
denotes that you will be tormented and injured by some evil person,
who may try to make you pay out money for his debts.
If he finds blood, you will be the loser in some transaction.

_Dogs_.

To dream of a vicious dog, denotes enemies and unalterable misfortune.
To dream that a dog fondles you, indicates great gain and constant friends.

To dream of owning a dog with fine qualities, denotes that you
will be possessed of solid wealth.

To dream that a blood-hound is tracking you, you are likely to fall
into some temptation, in which there is much danger of your downfall.

To dream of small dogs, indicates that your thoughts and chief
pleasures are of a frivolous order.

To dream of dogs biting you, foretells for you a quarrelsome
companion either in marriage or business.

Lean, filthy dogs, indicate failure in business, also sickness among children.

To dream of a dog-show, is indicative of many and varied favors from fortune.

To hear the barking of dogs, foretells news of a depressing nature.
Difficulties are more than likely to follow.  To see dogs on the chase
of foxes, and other large game, denotes an unusual briskness in all affairs.

To see fancy pet dogs, signifies a love of show, and that the owner
is selfish and narrow.  For a young woman, this dream foretells a fop
for a sweetheart.

To feel much fright upon seeing a large mastiff, denotes that you will
experience inconvenience because of efforts to rise above mediocrity.
If a woman dreams this, she will marry a wise and humane man.

To hear the growling and snarling of dogs, indicates that you
are at the mercy of designing people, and you will be afflicted
with unpleasant home surroundings.

To hear the lonely baying of a dog, foretells a death or a long
separation from friends.

To hear dogs growling and fighting, portends that you will be overcome
by your enemies, and your life will be filled with depression.

To see dogs and cats seemingly on friendly terms, and suddenly turning
on each other, showing their teeth and a general fight ensuing,
you will meet with disaster in love and worldly pursuits, unless you
succeed in quelling the row.

If you dream of a friendly white dog approaching you, it portends
for you a victorious engagement whether in business or love.
For a woman, this is an omen of an early marriage.

To dream of a many-headed dog, you are trying to maintain too many branches of
business at one time.  Success always comes with concentration of energies.
A man who wishes to succeed in anything should be warned by this dream.

To dream of a mad dog, your most strenuous efforts will not bring
desired results, and fatal disease may be clutching at your vitals.
If a mad dog succeeds in biting you, it is a sign that you or some loved
one is on the verge of insanity, and a deplorable tragedy may occur.

To dream of traveling alone, with a dog following you, foretells stanch
friends and successful undertakings.

To dream of dogs swimming, indicates for you an easy stretch
to happiness and fortune.

To dream that a dog kills a cat in your presence, is significant
of profitable dealings and some unexpected pleasure.

For a dog to kill a snake in your presence, is an omen of good luck

_Dolphin_.

To dream of a dolphin, indicates your liability to come under
a new government.  It is not a very good dream.

_Dome_.

To dream that you are in the dome of a building, viewing a
strange landscape, signifies a favorable change in your life.
You will occupy honorable places among strangers.

To behold a dome from a distance, portends that you will never
reach the height of your ambition, and if you are in love,
the object of your desires will scorn your attention.

_Dominoes_.

To dream of playing at dominoes, and lose, you will be affronted by a friend,
and much uneasiness for your safety will be entertained by your people,
as you will not be discreet in your affairs with women or other matters
that engage your attention.

If you are the winner of the game, it foretells that you will be much courted
and admired by certain dissolute characters, bringing you selfish pleasures,
but much distress to your relatives.

_Donkey_.

To dream of a donkey braying in your face, denotes that you are about
to be publicly insulted by a lewd and unscrupulous person.

To hear the distant braying filling space with melancholy,
you will receive wealth and release from unpleasant bonds
by the death of some person close to you.

If you see yourself riding on a donkey, you will visit foreign lands
and make many explorations into places difficult of passage.

To see others riding donkeys, denotes a meagre inheritance for them
and a toiling life.

To dream of seeing many of the old patriarchs traveling on donkeys,
shows that the influence of Christians will be thrown against you
in your selfish wantonness, causing you to ponder over the rights
and duties of man to man.

To drive a donkey, signifies that all your energies and pluck will be brought
into play against a desperate effort on the part of enemies to overthrow you.
If you are in love, evil women will cause you trouble.

If you are kicked by this little animal, it shows that you
are carrying on illicit connections, from which you will suffer
much anxiety from fear of betrayal.

If you lead one by a halter, you will be master of every situation,
and lead women into your way of seeing things by flattery.

To see children riding and driving donkeys, signifies health
and obedience for them.

To fall or be thrown from one, denotes ill luck and disappointment
in secular affairs.  Lovers will quarrel and separate.

To see one dead, denotes satiated appetites, resulting
from licentious excesses.

To dream of drinking the milk of a donkey, denotes that whimsical desires
will be gratified, even to the displacement of important duties.

If you see in your dreams a strange donkey among your stock,
or on your premises, you will inherit some valuable effects.

To dream of coming into the possession of a donkey by present, or buying,
you will attain to enviable heights in the business or social world,
and if single, will contract a congenial marriage.

To dream of a white donkey, denotes an assured and lasting fortune,
which will enable you to pursue the pleasures or studies that lie
nearest your heart.  For a woman, it signals entrance into that
society for which she has long entertained the most ardent desire.
Woman has in her composition those qualities, docility and stubbornness,
which tallies with the same qualities in the donkey; both being
supplied from the same storehouse, mother Nature; and consequently,
they would naturally maintain an affinity, and the ugliest phase of
the donkey in her dreams are nothing but woman's nature being sounded
for her warning, or _vice versa_ when pleasure is just before her.

_Doomsday_.

To dream that you are living on, and looking forward to seeing doomsday,
is a warning for you to give substantial and material affairs close attention,
or you will find that the artful and scheming friends you are entertaining
will have possession of what they desire from you, which is your wealth,
and not your sentimentality.

To a young woman, this dream encourages her to throw aside the attention
of men above her in station and accept the love of an honest and deserving
man near her.

_Door_.

To dream of entering a door, denotes slander, and enemies
from whom you are trying in vain to escape.  This is the same
of any door, except the door of your childhood home.
If it is this door you dream of entering, your days will be
filled with plenty and congeniality.

To dream of entering a door at night through the rain, denotes, to women,
unpardonable escapades; to a man, it is significant of a drawing on his
resources by unwarranted vice, and also foretells assignations.

To see others go through a doorway, denotes unsuccessful
attempts to get your affairs into a paying condition.
It also means changes to farmers and the political world.
To an author, it foretells that the reading public will reprove
his way of stating facts by refusing to read his later works.

To dream that you attempt to close a door, and it falls from
its hinges, injuring some one, denotes that malignant evil
threatens your friend through your unintentionally wrong advice.
If you see another attempt to lock a door, and it falls from
its hinges, you will have knowledge of some friend's misfortune
and be powerless to aid him.

_Door Bell_.

To dream you hear or ring a door bell, foretells unexpected tidings,
or a hasty summons to business, or the bedtide of a sick relative.

_Doves_.

Dreaming of doves mating and building their nests, indicates peacefulness
of the world and joyous homes where children render obedience, and mercy
is extended to all.

To hear the lonely, mournful voice of a dove, portends sorrow and
disappointment through the death of one to whom you looked for aid.
Often it portends the death of a father.

To see a dead dove, is ominous of a separation of husband and wife,
either through death or infidelity.

To see white doves, denotes bountiful harvests and the utmost
confidence in the loyalty of friends.

To dream of seeing a flock of white doves, denotes peaceful,
innocent pleasures, and fortunate developments in the future.

If one brings you a letter, tidings of a pleasant nature from absent
friends is intimated, also a lovers' reconciliation is denoted.

If the dove seems exhausted, a note of sadness will pervade
the reconciliation, or a sad touch may be given the pleasant tidings
by mention of an invalid friend; if of business, a slight drop may follow.
If the letter bears the message that you are doomed, it foretells
that a desperate illness, either your own or of a relative,
may cause you financial misfortune.

_Dowry_.

To dream that you fail to receive a dowry, signifies penury
and a cold world to depend on for a living.  If you receive it,
your expectations for the day will be fulfilled.  The opposite
may be expected if the dream is superinduced by the previous
action of the waking mind.

_Dragon_.[57]

To dream of a dragon, denotes that you allow yourself to be governed
by your passions, and that you are likely to place yourself in the power
of your enemies through those outbursts of sardonic tendencies.
You should be warned by this dream to cultivate self-control.


[57] See Devil.

_Drama_.

To see a drama, signifies pleasant reunions with distant friends.

To be bored with the performance of a drama, you will be forced to accept
an uncongenial companion at some entertainment or secret affair.

To write one, portends that you will be plunged into distress and debt,
to be extricated as if by a miracle.

_Dram-drinking_.

To be given to dram-drinking in your dreams, omens ill-natured rivalry
and contention for small possession.  To think you have quit dram-drinking,
or find that others have done so, shows that you will rise above present
estate and rejoice in prosperity.

_Draw-knife_.

To see or use a draw-knife, portends unfulfiled hopes or desires.

Some fair prospect will loom before you, only to go down in
mistake and disappointment.

_Dressing_.

To think you are having trouble in dressing, while dreaming, means some evil
persons will worry and detain you from places of amusement.

If you can't get dressed in time for a train, you will
have many annoyances through the carelessness of others.
You should depend on your own efforts as far as possible,
after these dreams, if you would secure contentment and full success.

_Drinking_.[58]

For a woman to dream of hilarious drinking, denotes that she
is engaging in affairs which may work to her discredit,
though she may now find much pleasure in the same.
If she dreams that she fails to drink clear water, though she
uses her best efforts to do so, she will fail to enjoy some
pleasure that is insinuatingly offered her.

[58] See Water.

_Driving_.[59]

To dream of driving a carriage, signifies unjust criticism
of your seeming extravagance.  You will be compelled to do things
which appear undignified.

To dream of driving a public cab, denotes menial labor,
with little chance for advancement.  If it is a wagon, you will
remain in poverty and unfortunate circumstances for some time.
If you are driven in these conveyances by others, you will
profit by superior knowledge of the world, and will always find
some path through difficulties.  If you are a man, you will,
in affairs with women, drive your wishes to a speedy consummation.
If a woman, you will hold men's hearts at low value after
succeeding in getting a hold on them.

[59] See Cab or Carriage.

_Dromedary_.

To dream of a dromedary, denotes that you will be the recipient
of unexpected beneficence, and will wear your new honors
with dignity; you will dispense charity with a gracious hands.
To lovers, this dream foretells congenial dispositions.

_Dropsy_.

To dream of being afflicted with the dropsy, denotes illness
for a time, but from which you will recover with renewed vigor.
To see others thus afflicted, denotes that you will hear from
the absent shortly, and have tidings of their good health.

_Drouth_.

This is-an evil dream, denoting warring disputes between nations,
and much bloodshed therefrom.  Shipwrecks and land disasters will occur,
and families will quarrel and separate; sickness will work damage also.
Your affairs will go awry, as well.

_Drowning_.

To dream of drowning, denotes loss of property and life;
but if you are rescued, you will rise from your present position
to one of wealth and honor.

To see others drowning, and you go to their relief, signifies that you will
aid your friend to high places, and will bring deserved happiness to yourself.

For a young woman to see her sweetheart drowned, denotes her
bereavement by death.

_Drum_.

To hear the muffled beating of a drum, denotes that some absent
friend is in distress and calls on you for aid.

To see a drum, foretells amiability of character and a great aversion
to quarrels and dissensions.  It is an omen of prosperity to the sailor,
the farmer and the tradesman alike.

_Drunk_.

This is an unfavorable dream if you are drunk on heavy liquors,
indicating profligacy and loss of employment.  You will be disgraced
by stooping to forgery or theft.

Back to Full Books