10,000 Dreams Interpreted [Or. . ."What's In A Dream"] [Or. . .Dreams, Their Scientific and Practical Interpretations]

will retain the love of former associates, though your position
will take you above their circle.

_Admonish_.

To admonish your child, or son, or some young person,
denotes that your generous principles will keep you in favor,
and fortune will be added to your gifts.

_Adopted_.

To see your adopted child, or parent, in your dreams, indicates that you
will amass fortune through the schemes and speculations of strangers.

To dream that you or others are adopting a child, you will make
an unfortunate change in your abode.

_Adultery_.[10]

To dream that you commit adultery, foretells that you will be
arrainged{sic} for some illegal action.  If a woman has this dream,
she will fail to hold her husband's affections, letting her
temper and spite overwhelm her at the least provocation.
If it is with her husband's friend, she will be unjustly ignored
by her husband.  Her rights will be cruelly trampled upon by him.
If she thinks she is enticing a youth into this act, she will be
in danger of desertion and divorced for her open intriguing.

For a young woman this implies abasement and low desires,
in which she will find strange adventures afford her pleasure.

[10] It is always good to dream that you have successfully resisted
any temptation.  To yield, is bad.  If a man chooses low ideals, vampirish
influences will swarm around him ready to help him in his nefarious designs.
Such dreams may only be the result of depraved elementary influences.
If a man chooses high ideals, he will be illuminated by the deific
principle within him, and will be exempt from lascivious dreams.
The man who denies the existence and power of evil spirits has no arcana
or occult knowledge.  Did not the black magicians of Pharaoh's time,
and Simon Magnus, the Sorcerer, rival the men of God?  The dreamer
of amorous sweets is warned to beware of scandal.

_Adulation_.

To dream that you seek adulation, foretells that you will pompously
fill unmerited positions of honor.

If you offer adulation, you will expressly part with some dear
belonging in the hope of furthering material interests.

_Advancement_.

To dream of advancing in any engagement, denotes your rapid ascendency
to preferment and to the consummation of affairs of the heart.

To see others advancing, foretells that friends will hold positions
of favor near you.

_Adversary_.[11]

To dream that you meet or engage with an adversary, denotes that
you will promptly defend any attacks on your interest.
Sickness may also threaten you after this dream.

If you overcome an adversary, you will escape the effect
of some serious disaster.

[11] See Enemies.

_Adventurer_.

To dream that you are victimized by an adventurer, proves that you
will be an easy prey for flatterers and designing villains.
You will be unfortunate in manipulating your affairs to
a smooth consistency.

For a young woman to think she is an adventuress, portends that she
will be too wrapped up in her own conduct to see that she is being
flattered into exchanging her favors for disgrace.

_Adversity_.

To dream that you are in the clutches of adversity, denotes that you
will have failures and continued bad prospects.

To see others in adversity, portends gloomy surroundings, and the illness
of some one will produce grave fears of the successful working of plans.[12]

[12] The old dream books give this as a sign of coming prosperity.
This definition is untrue.  There are two forces at work in man, one from
within and the other from without.  They are from two distinct spheres;
the animal mind influenced by the personal world of carnal appetites,
and the spiritual mind from the realm of universal Brotherhood,
present antagonistic motives on the dream consciousness.  If these two
forces were in harmony, the spirit or mental picture from the dream
mind would find a literal fulfilment in the life of the dreamer.
The pleasurable sensations of the body cause the spirit anguish.
The selfish enrichment of the body impoverishes the spirit influence upon
the Soul.  The trials of adversity often cause the spirit to rejoice
and the flesh to weep.  If the cry of the grieved spirit is left
on the dream mind it may indicate to the dreamer worldly advancement,
but it is hardly the theory of the occult forces, which have contributed
to the contents of this book.

_Advertisement_.

To dream that you are getting out advertisements, denotes that you
will have to resort to physical labor to promote your interest,
or establish your fortune.

To read advertisements, denotes that enemies will overtake you,
and defeat you in rivalry.

_Advice_.

To dream that you receive advice, denotes that you will be enabled to raise
your standard of integrity, and strive by honest means to reach independent
competency and moral altitude.

To dream that you seek legal advice, foretells that there will
be some transactions in your affairs which will create doubt
of their merits and legality.

_Advocate_.

To dream that you advocate any cause, denotes that you will be faithful
to your interests, and endeavor to deal honestly with the public,
as your interests affect it, and be loyal to your promises to friends.

_Afraid_.

To feel that you are afraid to proceed with some affair, or continue
a journey, denotes that you will find trouble in your household,
and enterprises will be unsuccessful.

To see others afraid, denotes that some friend will be deterred
from performing some favor for you because of his own difficulties.

For a young woman to dream that she is afraid of a dog,
there will be a possibility of her doubting a true friend.

_Africa_.

To dream that you are in Africa surrounded by Cannibals, foretells that you
will be oppressed by enemies and quarrelsome persons.

For a woman to dream of African scenes, denotes she will make journeys
which will prove lonesome and devoid of pleasure or profit.

_Afternoon_.

For a woman to dream of an afternoon, denotes she will form
friendships which will be lasting and entertaining.  A cloudy,
rainy afternoon, implies disappointment and displeasure.

_Affliction_.

To dream that affliction lays a heavy hand upon you and calls your energy
to a halt, foretells that some disaster is surely approaching you.

To see others afflicted, foretells that you will be surrounded
by many ills and misfortunes.

_Affrighted_.

To dream that you are affrighted, foretells that you will sustain
an injury through an accident.

[13] See Agony.  {unable to tie this note to the text???}


To see others affrighted, brings you close to misery and distressing scenes.
Dreams of this nature are frequently caused by nervous and feverish
conditions, either from malaria or excitement.  When such is the case,
the dreamer is warned to take immediate steps to remove the cause.
Such dreams or reveries only occur when sleep is disturbed.

_Affront_.

This is a bad dream.  The dreamer is sure to shed tears and weep.
For a young woman to dream that she is affronted, denotes that some
unfriendly person will take advantage of her ignorance to place
her in a compromising situation with a stranger, or to jeopardize
her interests with a friend.

_Affluence_.[14]

To dream that you are in affluence, foretells that you will make
fortunate ventures, and will be pleasantly associated with
people of wealth.  To young women, a vision of weird and fairy
affluence is ominous of illusive and evanescent pleasure.
They should study more closely their duty to friends and parents.
After dreams of this nature they are warned to cultivate a love
for home life.

[14] See Wealth.

_Agate_.

To see agate in a dream, signifies a slight advancement in business affairs.

_Age_.

To dream of age, portends failures in any kind of undertaking.

To dream of your own age, indicates that perversity of opinion will bring
down upon you the indignation of relatives.

For a young woman to dream of being accused of being older
than she is, denotes that she will fall into bad companionship,
and her denial of stated things will be brought to scorn.
To see herself looking aged, intimates possible sickness,
or unsatisfactory ventures.  If it is her lover she sees aged,
she will be in danger of losing him.

_Agony_.[15]

This is not as good a dream, as some would wish you to believe.
It portends worry and pleasure intermingled, more of the former
than of the latter.

To be in agony over the loss of money, or property, denotes that disturbing
and imaginary fears will rack you over the critical condition of affairs,
or the illness of some dear relative.

[15] See Weeping.

_Ague_.

A sickly condition of the dreamer is sometimes implied by this dream.
To dream that you are shaking with an ague, signifies that you will suffer
from some physical disorder, and that fluctuating opinions of your own
affairs may bring you to the borders of prostration.

To see others thus affected, denotes that you will offend people
by your supreme indifference to the influences of others.

_Air_.

This dream denotes a withering state of things, and bodes no good
to the dreamer.

To dream of breathing hot air suggests that you will be influenced
to evil by oppression.

To feel cold air, denotes discrepancies in your business,
and incompatibility in domestic relations.

To feel oppressed with humidity, some curse will fall on you
that will prostrate and close down on your optimistical views
of the future.

_Alabaster_.

To dream of alabaster, foretells success in marriage and all
legitimate affairs.  To break an alabaster figure or vessel,
denotes sorrow and repentence.  For a young woman to lose an
alabaster box containing incense, signifies that she will lose
her lover or property through carelessness of her reputation.

_Alarm Bell_.

To hear a bell in your sleep, denotes that you will have cause for anxiety.

_Album_.

To dream of an album, denotes you will have success and true friends.

For a young woman to dream of looking at photographs in an album,
foretells that she will soon have a new lover who will be very
agreeable to her.

_Ale-house_.

The dreamer of an ale-house should be very cautious of his affairs.
Enemies are watching him.

_Alien_.

To dream of a stranger pleasing you, denotes good health and
pleasant surroundings; if he displeases you, look for disappointments.

To dream you are an alien, denotes abiding friendships.

_Alley_.

To dream of an alley, denotes your fortune will not be so pleasing
or promising as formerly.  Many vexing cares will present
themselves to you.

For a young woman to wander through an alley after dark, warns her
of disreputable friendships and a stigma on her character.

_Alligator_.

To dream of an alligator, unless you kill it, is unfavorable to all persons
connected with the dream.  It is a dream of caution.

_Alloy_.

To dream of alloy, denotes your business will vex you in its complications.
For a woman to dream of alloy, is significant of sorrow and trouble
completely hiding pleasure.

_Almanac_.

To dream of an almanac, means variable fortunes and illusive pleasures.
To be studying the signs, foretells that you will be harassed by small
matters taking up your time.

_Almonds_.

This is a good omen.  It has wealth in store.  However, sorrow will
go with it for a short while.  If the almonds are defective,
your disappointment in obtaining a certain wish will be complete
until new conditions are brought about.

_Alms_.

Alms will bring evil if given or taken unwillingly.  Otherwise, a good dream.

_Alms-house_.

For a young woman to dream of an alms-house, denotes she will meet
failure in her efforts to contract a worldly marriage.

_Altar_.

To dream of seing{sic} a priest at the altar, denotes quarrels
and unsatisfactory states in your business and home.
To see a marriage, sorrow to friends, and death to old age.

An altar would hardly be shown you in a dream, accept to warn you
against the commission of error.  Repentance is also implied.

_Alum_.

Alum seen in a dream, portends frustration of well laid plans.
To taste alum, denotes secret remorse over some evil work by you
upon some innocent person.

For a woman to dream of quantities of alum, foretells disappointment
in her marriage and loss of affection.

_Aluminum_.

To dream of aluminum, denotes contentment with any fortune, however small.
For a woman to see her aluminum ornaments or vessels tarnished,
foretells strange and unexpected sorrow, and loss will befall her.

_Amateur_.

To dream of seeing an amateur actor on the stage, denotes that you
will see your hopes pleasantly and satisfactorily fulfilled.
If they play a tragedy, evil will be disseminated through your happiness.
If there is an indistinctness or distorted images in the dream,
you are likely to meet with quick and decided defeat in some enterprise
apart from your regular business.

_Ambush_.

To dream that your are atacked{sic} from ambush, denotes that you
have lurking secretly near you a danger, which will soon set upon
and overthrow you if you are heedless of warnings.

If you lie in ambush to revenge yourself on others, you will unhesitatingly
stoop to debasing actions to defraud your friends.

_America_.

High officials should be careful of State affairs, others will do well to look
after their own person, for some trouble is at hand after this dream.

_Amethyst_.

Amethyst seen in a dream, represents contentment with fair business.

For a young woman to lose an amethyst, fortells broken engagements
and slights in love.

_Ammonia_.

Ammonia seen in a dream, means displeasure will be felt by the dreamer
at the conduct of a friend.  Quarrels and disruptions of friendships
will follow this dream.

For a young woman to see clear bottles of ammonia, foretells she
will be deceived in the character and intentions of some person
whom she considers friendly.

_Ammunition_.

To dream of ammunition, foretells the undertaking of some work,
which promises fruitful completion.  To dream your ammunition
is exhausted, denotes fruitless struggles and endeavors.

_Amorous_.

To dream you are amorous, warns you against personal desires and pleasures,
as they are threatening to engulf you in scandal.

For a young woman it portends illicit engagements, unless she chooses
staid and moral companions.  For a married woman, it foreshadows
discontent and desire for pleasure outside the home.

To see others amorous, foretells that you will be persuaded to neglect
your moral obligations.  To see animals thus, denotes you will engage
in degrading pleasures with fast men or women.

_Amputation_.

Ordinary amputation of limbs, denotes small offices lost;
the loss of entire legs or arms, unusual depression in trade.
To seamen, storm and loss of property.  Afflicted persons
should be warned to watchfulness after this dream.

_Anchor_.

To dream of an anchor is favorable to sailors, if seas are calm.
To others it portends separation from friends, change of residence,
and foreign travel.  Sweethearts are soon to quarrel if either
sees an anchor.

_Andirons_.

Andirons seen in a dream, denotes good will among friends,
if the irons support burning logs; if they are in an empty fireplace,
loss of property and death are signified.

_Anecdote_.

To dream of relating an anecdote, signifies that you will greatly prefer
gay companionship to that of intellect, and that your affairs will prove
as unstable as yourself.

For a young woman to hear anecdotes related, denotes that she
will be one of a merry party of pleasure-seekers.

_Angels_.

To dream of angels is prophetic of disturbing influences in the soul.
It brings a changed condition of the person's lot.  If the dream
is unusually pleasing, you will hear of the health of friends,
and receive a legacy from unknown relatives.

If the dream comes as a token of warning, the dreamer may
expect threats of scandal about love or money matters.
To wicked people, it is a demand to repent; to good people it
should be a consolation.

_Anger_.

To dream of anger, denotes that some awful trial awaits you.
Disappointments in loved ones, and broken ties, of enemies
may make new attacks upon your property or character.

To dreams that friends or relatives are angry with you, while you meet their
anger with composure, denotes you will mediate between opposing friends,
and gain their lasting favor and gratitude.

_Angling_.

To dream of catching fish is good.  If you fail to catch any,
it will be bad for you.

_Annoy_.

This dream denotes that you have enemies who are at work against you.
Annoyances experienced in dreams are apt to find speedy fulfilment
in the trifling incidents of the following day.

_Antelope_.

Seeing antelopes in a dream, foretells your ambitions will be high,
but may be realized by putting forth great energy.

For a young woman to see an antelope miss its footing and fall from a height,
denotes the love she aspires to will prove her undoing.

_Ants_.

The dreamer of ants should expect many petty annoyances during the day;
chasing little worries, and finding general dissatisfaction in all things.

_Anvil_.

To see hot iron with sparks flying, is significant of a pleasing work;
to the farmer, an abundant crop; favorable indeed to women.
Cold, or small, favors may be expected from those in power.
The means of success is in your power, but in order to obtain it
you will have to labor under difficulty.  If the anvil is broken,
it foretells that you have, through your own neglect, thrown away
promising opportunities that cannot be recalled.

_Anxiety_.

A dream of this kind is occasionally a good omen, denoting,
after threatening states, success and rejuvenation of mind;
but if the dreamer is anxious about some momentous affair,
it indicates a disastrous combination of business and social states.

_Apes_.

This dream brings humiliation and disease to some dear friend.

To see a small ape cling to a tree, warns the dreamer to beware; a false
person is close to you and will cause unpleasantness in your circle.
Deceit goes with this dream.

_Apparel_.[16]

Dreams of apparel, denote that enterprises will be successes or failures,
as the apparel seems to be whole and clean, or soiled and threadbare.

To see fine apparel, but out of date, foretells that you will have fortune,
but you will scorn progressive ideas.

If you reject out-of-date apparel, you will outgrow present environments
and enter into new relations, new enterprises and new loves, which will
transform you into a different person.

To see yourself or others appareled in white, denotes eventful changes,
and you will nearly always find the change bearing sadness.

To walk with a person wearing white, proclaims that person's
illness or distress, unless it be a young woman or child,
then you will have pleasing surroundings for a season at least.

To see yourself, or others, dressed in black, portends quarrels,
disappointments, and disagreeable companions; or, if it refers
to business, the business will fall short of expectations.

To see yellow apparel, foretells approaching gaieties and financial progress.
Seen as a flitting spectre, in an unnatural light, the reverse may
be expected.  You will be fortunate if you dream of yellow cloth.

To dream of blue apparel, signifies carrying forward to victory
your aspirations, through energetic, insistent efforts.
Friends will loyally support you.

To dream of crimson apparel, foretells that you will escape formidable
enemies by a timely change in your expressed intention.

To see green apparel, is a hopeful sign of prosperity and happiness.

To see many colored apparel, foretells swift changes, and intermingling
of good and bad influences in your future.

To dream of misfitting apparel, intimates crosses in your affections,
and that you are likely to make a mistake in some enterprise.

To see old or young in appropriate apparel, denotes that you
will undertake some engagement for which you will have no liking,
and which will give rise to many cares.

For a woman to dream that she is displeased with her apparel,
foretells that she will find many vexatious rivalries in her quest
for social distinction.

To admire the apparel of others, denotes that she will have jealous
fears of her friends.

To dream of the loss of any article of apparel, denotes disturbances
in your business and love affairs.

For a young woman to dream of being attired in a guazy black costume,
foretells she will undergo chastening sorrow and disappointment.

For a young woman to dream that she meets another attired in a crimson dress
with a crepe mourning veil over her face, foretells she will be outrivaled
by one she hardly considers her equal, and bitter disappointment will sour
her against women generally.

The dreamer interpreting the dream of apparel should be careful
to note whether the objects are looking natural.  If the faces are
distorted and the light unearthly, though the colors are bright,
beware; the miscarriage of some worthy plan will work you harm.
There are few dreams in which the element of evil is wanting,
as there are few enterprises in waking life from which the element
of chance is obviated.

[16] See Clothes and Coat.

_Apparition_.

Take unusual care of all depending upon you.  Calamity awaits you and yours.
Both property and life are in danger.  Young people should be
decidedly upright in their communications with the opposite sex.
Character is likely to be rated at a discount.

_Apples_.

This is a very good dream to the majority of people.

To see red apples on trees with green foliage is exceedingly propitious
to the dreamer.

To eat them is not as good, unless they be faultless.
A friend who interprets dreams says:  ``Ripe apples on a tree,
denotes that the time has arrived for you to realize your hopes;
think over what you intend to do, and go fearlessly ahead.
Ripe on the top of the tree, warns you not to aim too high.
Apples on the ground imply that false friends, and flatterers
are working you harm.  Decayed apples typify hopeless efforts.''

_Apprentice_.

To dream that you serve as an apprentice, foretells you will have a struggle
to win a place among your companions

_Apricot_.

Dreams of seeing apricots growing, denote that the future, though seemingly
rosy hued, holds masked bitterness and sorrow for you.

To eat them signifies the near approach of calamitous influences.
If others eat them, your surroundings will be unpleasant
and disagreeable to your fancies.  A friend says:
``Apricots denote that you have been wasting time over trifles
or small things of no value.''

_April_.

To dream of the month of April, signifies that much pleasure
and profit will be your allotment.  If the weather is miserable,
it is a sign of passing ill luck.

_Apron_.

To dream of an apron, signifies a zigzag course, for a young woman.
For a school girl to dream that her apron is loosened, or torn,
implies bad lessons, and lectures in propriety from parents and teachers.

_Arch_.

An arch in a dream, denotes your rise to distinction and the gaining of wealth
by persistent effort.  To pass under one, foretells that many will seek you
who formerly ignored your position.

For a young woman to see a fallen arch, denotes the destruction of her hopes,
and she will be miserable in her new situation.

_Archbishop_.

To dream of seeing an archbishop, foretells you will have many obstacles
to resist in your attempt to master fortune or rise to public honor.
To see one in the every day dress of a common citizen, denotes you
will have aid and encouragement from those in prominent positions
and will succeed in your enterprises.

For a young woman to dream that an archbishop is kindly directing her,
foretells she will be fortunate in forming her friendships.

_Architect_.

Architects drawing plans in your dreams, denotes a change in your business,
which will be likely to result in loss to you.

For a young woman to see an architect, foretells she will meet rebuffs
in her aspirations and maneuvers to make a favorable marriage.

_Arm_.

To dream of seeing an arm amputated, means separation or divorce.
Mutual dissatisfaction will occur between husband and wife.
It is a dream of sinister import.  Beware of deceitfulness and fraud.

_Aroma_.

For a young woman to dream of a sweet aroma, denotes she will soon
be the recipient of some pleasure or present.

_Arrested_.[17]

To see respectable-looking strangers arrested, foretells that you desire
to make changes, and new speculations will be subordinated by the fear
of failure.  If they resist the officers, you will have great delight
in pushing to completion the new enterprise.

[17] See Prisoner.

_Arrow_.

Pleasure follows this dream.  Entertainments, festivals and pleasant
journeys may be expected.  Suffering will cease.

An old or broken arrow, portends disappointments in love or business.

_Art Gallery_.

To visit an art gallery, portends unfortunate unions in domestic circles.
You will struggle to put forth an appearance of happiness, but will secretly
care for other associations.

_Ascend_.

If you reach the extreme point of ascent, or top of steps, without stumbling,
it is good; otherwise, you will have obstacles to overcome before the good
of the day is found.

_Asceticism_.

To dream of asceticism, denotes that you will cultivate strange
principles and views, rendering yourself fascinating to strangers,
but repulsive to friends.

_Ashes_.

Dreaming of ashes omens woe, and many bitter changes are
sure to come to the dreamer.  Blasted crops to the farmer.
Unsuccessful deals for the trader.  Parents will reap the sorrows
of wayward children.

_Asia_.

To dream of visiting Asia is assurance of change, but no material
benefits from fortune will follow.

_Asp_.

This is an unfortunate dream.  Females may lose the respect of honorable
and virtuous people.  Deadly enemies are at work to defame character.
Sweethearts will wrong each other.

_Asparagus_.

To dream of asparagus, signifies prosperous surroundings and obedience
from servants and children.  To eat it, denotes interrupted success.

_Ass_.[18]

To see an ass in a dream, you will meet many annoyances,
and delays will accrue in receiving news or goods.

To see donkeys carrying burdens, denotes that, after patience and toil,
you will succeed in your undertakings, whether of travel or love.

If an ass pursues you, and you are afraid of it, you will be the victim
of scandal or other displeasing reports.

If you unwillingly ride on one, or, as jockey, unnecessary
quarrels may follow.

[18] See Donkey.

_Assassin_.

If you are the one to receive the assassin's blow, you will not surmount
all your trials.

To see another, with the assassin standing over him with blood stains,
portends that misfortune will come to the dreamer.

To see an assassin under any condition is a warning that losses
may befall you through secret enemies.

_Assistance_.

Giving assistance to any one in a dream, foretells you will be favored
in your efforts to rise to higher position.

If any one assists you, you will be pleasantly situated,
and loving friends will be near you.

_Asylum_.

To dream of an asylum, denotes sickness and unlucky dealings,
which cannot be overcome without great mental struggle.

_Astral_.

Dreams of the astral, denote that your efforts and plans will culminate
in worldly success and distinction.  A spectre or picture of your astral
self brings heart-rending tribulation.

_Atlas_.

To dream you are looking at an atlas, denotes that you will carefully
study interests before making changes or journeys.

_Atonement_.

Means joyous communing with friends, and speculators need not fear any drop
in stocks.  Courting among the young will meet with happy consummation.
The sacrifice or atonement of another for your waywardness, is portentous
of the humiliation of self or friends through your open or secret disregard
of duty.  A woman after this dream is warned of approaching disappointment.

_Attic_.

To dream that you are in an attic, denotes that you are entertaining
hopes which will fail of materialization.

For a young woman to dream that she is sleeping in an attic, foretells that
she will fail to find contentment in her present occupation.

_Attorney_.

To see an attorney at the bar, denotes that disputes of a serious
nature will arise between parties interested in worldly things.
Enemies are stealing upon you with false claims.  If you see an attorney
defending you, your friends will assist you in coming trouble,
but they will cause you more worry than enemies.

_Auction_.

To dream of an auction in a general way, is good.
If you hear the auctioneer crying his sales, it means bright
prospects and fair treatment from business ventures.

To dream of buying at an auction, signifies close deals to tradesmen,
and good luck in live stock to the farmer.  Plenty, to the housewife
is the omen for women.  If there is a feeling of regret about the dream,
you are warned to be careful of your business affairs.

_August_.

To dream of the month of August, denotes unfortunate deals,
and misunderstandings in love affairs.

For a young woman to dream that she is going to be married in August,
is an omen of sorrow in her early wedded life.

_Augur_.

To see augurs in your dreams, is a forecast of labor and toil.

_Aunt_.

For a young woman to dream of seeing her aunt, denotes she will receive
sharp censure for some action, which will cause her much distress.

If this relative appears smiling and happy, slight difference
will soon give way to pleasure.

_Aura_.

To dream of discussing any subject relating to aura, denotes that you
will reach states of mental unrest, and work to discover the power
which influences you from within.

_Autumn_.

For a woman to dream of Autumn, denotes she will obtain property
through the struggles of others.  If she thinks of marrying in Autumn,
she will be likely to contract a favorable marriage and possess
a cheerful home.

_Automobile_.

To dream that you ride in an automobile, denotes that you will be restless
under pleasant conditions, and will make a change in your affairs.
There is grave danger of impolitic conduct intimated through a dream
of this nature.

If one breaks down with you, the enjoyment of a pleasure will not extend
to the heights you contemplate.

To find yourself escaping from the path of one, signifies that you
will do well to avoid some rival as much as you can honestly allow.

For a young woman to look for one, she will be disappointed in her aims
to entice some one into her favor.

_Author_.

For an author to dream that his manuscript has been rejected
by the publisher, denotes some doubt at first, but finally
his work will be accepted as authentic and original.

To dream of seeing an author over his work, perusing it with anxiety,
denotes that you will be worried over some literary work either of your
own or that of some other person.

_Awake_.

To dream that you are awake, denotes that you will experience
strange happenings which will throw you into gloom.

To pass through green, growing fields, and look upon landscape,
in your dreams, and feel that it is an awaking experience,
signifies that there is some good and brightness in store for you,
but there will be disappointments intermingled between the present
and that time.

_Axe_.

Seeing an axe in a dream, foretells that what enjoyment
you may have will depend on your struggles and energy.
To see others using an axe, foretells, your friends will be
energetic and lively, making existence a pleasure when near them.

For a young woman to see one, portends her lover will be worthy,
but not possessed with much wealth.  A broken or rusty axe,
indicates illness and loss of money and property.



B. ``_God came to Abimelech in a dream by night, and said to him,
`Behold, thou art but a dead man, for the woman thou hast taken;
for she is a man's wife_.''--Gen. xx., 3rd.

_Baby_.

To dream of crying babies, is indicative of ill health and disappointments.

A bright, clean baby, denotes love requited, and many warm friends.
Walking alone, it is a sure sign of independence and a total ignoring
of smaller spirits.  If a woman dream she is nursing a baby,
she will be deceived by the one she trusts most.

It is a bad sign to dream that you take your baby if sick with fever.
You will have many sorrows of mind.

_Baby Carriages_.

To dream of a baby carriage, denotes that you will have a congenial
friend who will devise many pleasurable surprises for you.

_Bachelor_.

For a man to dream that he is a bachelor, is a warning for him
to keep clear of women.

For a woman to dream of a bachelor, denotes love not born of purity.
Justice goes awry.  Politicians lose honor.

_Back_.

To dream of seeing a nude back, denotes loss of power.
Lending advice or money is dangerous.  Sickness often
attends this dream.

To see a person turn and walk away from you, you may be sure envy
and jealousy are working to your hurt.

To dream of your own back, bodes no good to the dreamer.

_Back-bite_.

Conditions will change from good to bad if you are joined
with others in back-biting.

For your friends to back-bite you, indicates worriment by
servants and children.

_Backgammon_.

To dream of playing backgammon, denotes that you will, while visiting,
meet with unfriendly hospitality, but will unconsciously win friendships
which will endure much straining.

If you are defeated in the game, you will be unfortunate in bestowing
your affections, and your affairs will remain in an unsettled condition.

_Bacon_.

To dream of eating bacon is good, if some one is eating with you
and hands are clean.

Rancid bacon, is dulness of perception and unsatisfactory states
will worry you.

To dream of curing bacon is bad, if not clear of salt and smoke.
If clear, it is good.

_Badger_.

To dream of a badger, is a sign of luck after battles with hardships.

_Bag-Pipe_.

This is not a bad dream, unless the music be harsh and the player in rags.

_Baghavad Ghitta_.

To dream of the Baghavad, foretells for you a season of seclusion;
also rest to the exhausted faculties.  A pleasant journey
for your advancement will be planned by your friends.
Little financial advancement is promised in this dream.

_Bail_.

If the dreamer is seeking bail, unforeseen troubles will arise;
accidents are likely to occur; unfortunate alliances may be made.

If you go bail for another, about the same conditions,
though hardly as bad.

_Bailiff_.

Shows a striving for a higher place, and a deficiency in intellect.
If the bailiff comes to arrest, or make love, false friends are trying
to work for your money.

_Bake-house_.

To dream of a bake-house, demands caution in making changes in one's career.
Pitfalls may reveal themselves on every hand.

For a young woman to dream that she is in a bake house,
portends that her character wil{l} be assailed.
She should exercise great care in her social affairs.

_Baking_.

Baking is unpropitious for a woman.  Ill health and the care of many children;
meanness and poverty of supporters are indicated.

_Balcony_.

For lovers to dream of making sad adieus on a balcony, long and perhaps
final separation may follow.  Balcony also denotes unpleasant news
of absent friends.

_Bald_.

To see a bald-headed man, denotes that sharpers are to make
a deal adverse to your interests, but by keeping wide awake,
you will outwit them.

For a man to dream of a bald-headed woman, insures him to have
a vixen for wife.

A bald hill, or mountain, indicates famine and suffering in various forms.

For a young woman to dream of a bald-headed man, is a warning to her to use
her intelligence against listening to her next marriage offer.

Bald-headed babies signify a happy home, a loving companion,
and obedient children.

_Ball_.

A very satisfactory omen, if beautiful and gaily-dressed
people are dancing to the strains of entrancing music.
If you feel gloomy and distressed at the inattention of others,
a death in the family may be expected soon.

_Ballet_.

Indicates infidelity in the marriage state; also failures in business,
and quarrels and jealousies among sweethearts.

_Balloon_.

Blighted hopes and adversity come with this dream.
Business of every character will sustain an apparent falling off.

To ascend in a balloon, denotes an unfortunate journey.

_Banishment_.

Evil pursues the unfortunate dreamer.  If you are banished
to foreign lands, death will be your portion at an early date.
To banish a child, means perjury of business allies.
It is a dream of fatality.

_Banjo_.

To dream of a banjo, denotes that pleasant amusements will be enjoyed.
To see a negro playing one, denotes that you will have slight worries,
but no serious vexation for a season.

For a young woman to see negroes with their banjos,
foretells that she will fail in some anticipated amusement.
She will have misunderstandings with her lover.

_Bank_.

To see vacant tellers, foretells business losses.
Giving out gold money, denotes carelessness; receiving it,
great gain and prosperity.

To see silver and bank-notes accumulated, increase of honor and fortune.
You will enjoy the highest respect of all classes.

_Bankrupt_.

Denotes partial collapse in business, and weakening of the brain faculties.
A warning to leave speculations alone.

_Banana_.

To dream of bananas, foretells that you will be mated to an uninteresting
and an unloved companion.

To eat them, foretells a tiresome venture in business,
and self-inflicted duty.

To see them decaying, you are soon to fall into some disagreeable enterprise.

To trade in them, non-productive interests will accumulate around you.

_Banner_.

To see one's country's banner floating in a clear sky, denotes triumph
over foreign foes.  To see it battered, is significant of wars and loss
of military honors on land and sea.

_Banquet_.

It is good to dream of a banquet.  Friends will wait to do you favors.
To dream of yourself, together with many gaily-attired guests,
eating from costly plate and drinking wine of fabulous price
and age, foretells enormous gain in enterprises of every nature,
and happiness among friends.

To see inharmonious influences, strange and grotesque faces or empty tables,
is ominous of grave misunderstandings or disappointments.

_Bantam_.

To see bantam chickens in your dream, denotes your fortune will
be small, yet you will enjoy contentment.  If they appear sickly,
or exposed to wintry storms, your interests will be impaired.

_Baptism_.

To dream of baptism, signifies that your character needs strengthening by
the practice of temperance in advocating your opinions to the disparagement
of your friends.

To dream that you are an applicant, signifies that you will humiliate
your inward self for public favor.

To dream that you see John the Baptist baptizing Christ in the Jordan,
denotes that you will have a desperate mental struggle between yielding
yourself to labor in meagre capacity for the sustenance of others,
or follow desires which might lead you into wealth and exclusiveness.

To see the Holy Ghost descending on Christ, is significant of resignation
to duty and abnegation of self.

If you are being baptized with the Holy Ghost and fire,
means that you will be thrown into a state of terror over being
discovered in some lustful engagement.

_Bar_.

To dream of tending a bar, denotes that you will resort to some questionable
mode of advancement.

Seeing a bar, denotes activity in communities, quick uplifting of fortunes,
and the consummation of illicit desires.

_Barber_.

To dream of a barber, denotes that success will come through struggling
and close attention to business.  For a young woman to dream of a barber,
foretells that her fortune will increase, though meagerly.

_Barefoot_.

To wander in the night barefoot with torn garments, denotes that you
will be crushed in expectation, and evil influences will surround
your every effort.

_Barley-field_.

The dreamer will obtain his highest desires, and every effort
will be crowned with success.  Decay in anything denotes loss.

_Barmaid_.

For a man to dream of a barmaid, denotes that his desires run
to low pleasures, and he will scorn purity.

For a young woman to dream that she is a barmaid, foretells that she
will be attracted to fast men, and that she will prefer irregular
pleasures to propriety.

_Barn_.

If well filled with ripe and matured grain, and perfect ears of corn,
with fat stock surrounding it, it is an omen of great prosperity.
If empty, the reverse may be expected.

_Barrel_.[19]

[19] See Cask.

_Barometer_.

To see a barometer in a dream, foretells a change will soon take
place in your affairs, which will prove profitable to you.
If it is broken, you will find displeasing incidents in
your business, arising unexpectedly.

_Baseball_.

To see baseball in your dream, denotes you will be easily contented,
and your cheerfulness will make you a popular companion.

For a young woman to dream that she is playing baseball,
means much pleasure for her, but no real profit or comfort.

_Basement_.[20]

To dream that you are in a basement, foretells that you
will see prosperous opportunities abating, and with them,
pleasure will dwindle into trouble and care.

[20] See Cellar.

_Basin_.

For a young woman to dream of bathing in a basin, foretells her womanly
graces will win her real friendships and elevations.

_Basket_.

To dream of seeing or carrying a basket, signifies that you
will meet unqualified success, if the basket is full;
but empty baskets indicate discontent and sorrow.

_Baste_.

To dream of basting meats while cooking, denotes you will
undermine your own expectations by folly and selfishness.
For a woman to baste her sewing, omens much vacation owing
to her extravagance.

_Bass Voice_.

To dream that you have a bass voice, denotes you will detect some discrepancy
in your business, brought about by the deceit of some one in your employ.
For the lover, this foretells estrangements and quarrels.

_Bath_.

For a young person to dream of taking a bath, means much solicitude
for one of the opposite sex, fearing to lose his good opinion through
the influence of others.

For a pregnant woman to dream this, denotes miscarriage or accident.
For a man, adultery.  Dealings of all kinds should be carried on
with discretion after this dream.

To go in bathing with others, evil companions should be avoided.
Defamation of character is likely to follow.  If the water
is muddy, evil, indeed death, and enemies are near you.

For a widow to dream of her bath, she has forgotten her former ties,
and is hurrying on to earthly loves.  Girls should shun male companions.
Men will engage in intrigues of salacious character.

A warm bath is generally significant of evil.  A cold, clear bath is
the fore-runner of joyful tidings and a long period of excellent health.
Bathing in a clear sea, denotes expansion of business and satisfying
research after knowledge.

_Bathroom_.

To see white roses in a bathroom, and yellow ones in a box,
denote that sickness will interfere with pleasure; but more
lasting joys will result from this disappointment.

For a young woman to dream of a bathroom, foretells that her inclinations
trend too much toward light pleasures and frivolities.

_Bats_.

Awful is the fate of the unfortunate dreamer of this ugly animal.
Sorrows and calamities from hosts of evil work against you.
Death of parents and friends, loss of limbs or sight,
may follow after a dream of these ghoulish monsters.
A white bat is almost a sure sign of death.  Often the death
of a child follows this dream.

_Battle_.

Battle signifies striving with difficulties, but a final victory
over the same.

If you are defeated in battle, it denotes that bad deals made
by others will mar your prospects for good.

_Bayonet_.

To dream of a bayonet, signifies that enemies will hold you in their power,
unless you get possession of the bayonet.

_Bay Tree_.

A palmy leisure awaits you in which you will meet many pleasing varieties
of diversions.  Much knowledge will be reaped in the rest from work.
It is generally a good dream for everybody.

_Beacon-light_.

For a sailor to see a beacon-light, portends fair seas and
a prosperous voyage.

For persons in distress, warm attachments and unbroken,
will arise among the young.

To the sick, speedy recovery and continued health.
Business will gain new impetus.  To see it go out in time
of storm or distress, indicates reverses at the time when you
thought Fortune was deciding in your favor.

_Beads_.

To dream of beads, foretells attention from those in elevated position will
be shown you.  To count beads, portends immaculate joy and contentment.
To string them, you will obtain the favor of the rich.

To scatter them, signifies loss of caste among your acquaintances.

_Beans_.

This is a bad dream.  To see them growing, omens worries
and sickness among children.

Dried beans, means much disappointment in worldly affairs.
Care should be taken to prevent contagious diseases from spreading.

To dream of eating them, implies the misfortune or illness
of a well loved friend.

_Bear_.

Bear is significant of overwhelming competition in pursuits of every kind.

To kill a bear, portends extrication from former entanglements.

A young woman who dreams of a bear will have a threatening rival
or some misfortune.

_Beard_.

To dream of seeing a beard, denotes that some uncongenial person will oppose
his will against yours, and there will be a fierce struggle for mastery,
and you are likely to lose some money in the combat.

Gray beard, signifies hard luck and quarrels.

To see beard on women, foretells unpleasant associations
and lingering illness.

For some one to pull your beard, denotes that you will run a narrow
risk if you do not lose property.

To comb and admire it, shows that your vanity will grow with prosperity,
making you detestable in the sight of many of your former companions.

For a young woman to admire a beard, intimates her desire to leave celibacy;
but she is threatened with an unfortunate marriage.

_Beat_.

It bodes no good to dream of being beaten by an angry person;
family jars and discord are signified.

To beat a child, ungenerous advantage is taken by you of another;
perhaps the tendency will be to cruelly treat a child.

_Beauty_.

Beauty in any form is pre-eminently good.  A beautiful woman brings
pleasure and profitable business.  A well formed and beautiful child,
indicates love reciprocated and a happy union.

_Beaver_.

To dream of seeing beavers, foretells that you will obtain
comfortable circumstances by patient striving.  If you dream
of killing them for their skins, you will be accused of fraud
and improper conduct toward the innocent.

_Bed_.

A bed, clean and white, denotes peaceful surcease of worries.
For a woman to dream of making a bed, signifies a new lover
and pleasant occupation.

To dream of being in bed, if in a strange room, unexpected friends
will visit you.  If a sick person dreams of being in bed,
new complications will arise, and, perhaps, death.

To dream that you are sleeping on a bed in the open air, foretells that you
will have delightful experiences, and opportunity for improving your fortune.
For you to see negroes passing by your bed, denotes exasperating circumstances
arising, which will interfere with your plans.

To see a friend looking very pale, lying in bed, signifies strange and woeful
complications will oppress your friends, bringing discontent to yourself.

For a mother to dream that her child wets a bed,
foretells she will have unusual anxiety, and persons sick,
will not reach recovery as early as may be expected.
For persons to dream that they wet the bed, denotes sickness,
or a tragedy will interfere with their daily routine of business.

_Bedbugs_.

Seen in your dreams, they indicate continued sickness and unhappy states.
Fatalities are intimated if you see them in profusion.

To see bedbugs simulating death, foretells unhappiness caused by illness.
To mash them, and water appears instead of blood, denotes alarming but not
fatal illness or accident.  To see bedbugs crawling up white walls, and you
throw scalding water upon them, denotes grave illness will distress you,
but there will be useless fear of fatality.

If the water fails to destroy them, some serious complication
with fatal results is not improbable.

_Bed Fellow_.

To dream that you do not like your bed fellow, foretells that
some person who has claims upon you, will censure and make
your surroundings unpleasant generally.

If you have a strange bed fellow, your discontent will worry all who come
near you.  If you think you have any kind of animal in bed with you,
there will be unbounded ill luck overhanging you.

_Bed-chamber_.

To see one newly furnished, a happy change for the dreamer.
Journeys to distant places, and pleasant companions.

_Beef_.

If raw and bloody, cancers and tumors of a malignant nature will attack
the subject.  Be on your guard as to bruises and hurts of any kind.

To see, or eat cooked beef, anguish surpassing human aid is before you.
Loss of life by horrible means will occur.  Beef properly served under
pleasing surroundings denotes harmonious states in love and business,
if otherwise, evil is foreboded, though it may be of a trifling nature.

_Beer_.

Fateful of disappointments if drinking from a bar.  To see others drinking,
work of designing intriguers will displace your fairest hopes.

To habitue's of this beverage, harmonious prospectives are foreshadowed,
if pleasing, natural and cleanly conditions survive.  The dream occurrences
frequently follow in the actual.

_Bees_.

Bees signify pleasant and profitable engagements.

For an officer, it brings obedient subjects and healthful environments.

To a preacher, many new members and a praying congregation.

To business men, increase in trade.  To parents, much pleasure
from dutiful children.  If one stings, loss or injury will bear
upon you from a friendly source.

_Beetles_.

To dream of seeing them on your person, denotes poverty and small ills.
To kill them is good.

_Beets_.

To see them growing abundantly, harvest and peace will obtain in the land;
eating them with others, is full of good tidings.

If they are served in soiled or impure dishes, distressful awakenings
will disturb you.

_Beggar_.

To see an old, decrepit beggar, is a sign of bad management,
and unless you are economical, you will lose much property.
Scandalous reports will prove detrimental to your fame.

To give to a beggar, denotes dissatisfaction with present surroundings.

To dream that you refuse to give to a beggar is altogether bad.

_Beheading_.

To dream of being beheaded, overwhelming defeat or failure
in some undertaking will soon follow.

To see others beheaded, if accompanied by a large flow of blood,
death and exile are portended.

_Bier_.

To see one, indicates disastrous losses and the early dissolution
of a dear relative.

To see one, strewn with flowers in a church, denotes an unfortunate marriage.

_Belladonna_.

Strategic moves will bring success in commercial circles.
Women will find rivals in society; vain and fruitless efforts
will be made for places in men's affections.

Taking it, denotes misery and failure to meet past debts.

_Bell-man_.

Fortune is hurrying after you.  Questions of importance will be settled
amicably among disputants.  To see him looking sad some sorrowful event
or misfortune may soon follow.

_Bellows_.

Working a bellows, denotes a struggle, but a final triumph over poverty
and fate by energy and perseverance.

To dream of seeing a bellows, distant friends are longing to see you.

To hear one, occult knowledge will be obtained by the help
of powerful means.  One fallen into disuse, portends you have
wasted energies under misguiding impulses.

_Bells_.

To hear bells tolling in your dreams, death of distant friends will occur,
and intelligence of wrong will worry you.

Liberty bells, indicate a joyous victory over an opponent.

_Belly_.[21]

It is bad to dream of seeing a swollen mortifying belly,
it indicates desperate sickness.

To see anything moving on the belly, prognosticates humiliation
and hard labor.

To see a healthy belly, denotes insane desires.

[21] See Abdomen.

_Belt_.

To dream that you have a new style belt, denotes you are soon to meet and
make engagements with a stranger, which will demoralize your prosperity.
If it is out of date, you will be meritedly censured for rudeness.

_Bench_.

Distrust debtors and confidants if you dream of sitting on one.

If you see others doing so, happy reunions between friends who have been
separated through misunderstandings are suggested.

_Bequest_.

After this dream, pleasures of consolation from the knowledge of duties
well performed, and the health of the young is assured.

_Bereavement_.

To dream of the bereavement of a child, warns you that your plans will meet
with quick frustration, and where you expect success there will be failure.

Bereavement of relatives, or friends, denotes disappointment
in well matured plans and a poor outlook for the future.

_Bet_.

Betting on races, beware of engaging in new undertakings.
Enemies are trying to divert your attention from legitimate business.

Betting at gaming tables, denotes that immoral devices will be used
to wring money from you.

_Bible_.

To dream of the Bible, foretells that innocent and disillusioned
enjoyment will be proffered for your acceptance.

To dream that you villify{sic} the teachings of the Bible,
forewarns you that you are about to succumb to resisted temptations
through the seductive persuasiveness of a friend.

_Bigamy_.

For a man to commit bigamy, denotes loss of manhood and failing mentality.
To a woman, it predicts that she will suffer dishonor unless very discreet.

_Bicycle_.

To dream of riding a bicycle up hill, signifies bright prospects.
Riding it down hill, if the rider be a woman, calls for care regarding
her good name and health; misfortune hovers near.

_Billiards_.

Billiards, foretell coming troubles to the dreamer.
Law suits and contentions over property.  Slander will get
in her work to your detriment.  If you see table and balls idle,
deceitful comrades are undermining you{.}

_Birds_.

It is a favorable dream to see birds of beautiful plumage.
A wealthy and happy partner is near if a woman has dreams
of this nature.

Moulting and songless birds, denotes merciless and inhuman treatment
of the outcast and fallen by people of wealth.

To see a wounded bird, is fateful of deep sorrow caused by erring offspring.

To see flying birds, is a sign of prosperity to the dreamer.
All disagreeable environments will vanish before the wave
of prospective good.

To catch birds, is not at all bad.  To hear them speak, is owning one's
inability to perform tasks that demand great clearness of perception.

To kill than with a gun, is disaster from dearth of harvest.

_Bird's Nest_.

To see an empty bird's nest, denotes gloom and a dull outlook for business.
With eggs in the nest, good results will follow all engagements.
If young ones are in the nest, it denotes successful journeys and
satisfactory dealings.  If they are lonely and deserted, sorrow, and folly
of yours will cause you anxiety.

_Birth_.

For a married woman to dream of giving birth to a child,
great joy and a handsome legacy is foretold.

For a single woman, loss of virtue and abandonment by her lover.

_Birthday_.

To dream of a birthday is a signal of poverty and falsehood to the young,
to the old, long trouble and desolation.

_Birthday Presents_.

Receiving happy surprises, means a multitude of high accomplishments.
Working people will advance in their trades.

Giving birthday presents, denotes small deferences, if given
at a fe^te or reception.

_Biscuits_.

Eating or baking them, indicates ill health and family peace ruptured
over silly disputes.

_Bishop_.

To dream of a bishop, teachers and authors will suffer great mental worries,
caused from delving into intricate subjects.

To the tradesman, foolish buying, in which he is likely to incur loss
of good money.

For one to see a bishop in his dreams, hard work will
be his patrimony, with chills and ague as attendant.
If you meet the approval of a much admired bishop, you will be
successful in your undertakings in love or business.

_Bite_.

This dream omens ill.

It implies a wish to undo work that is past undoing.
You are also likely to suffer losses through some enemy.

_Blackberries_.

To dream of blackberries denotes many ills.  To gather them is unlucky.
Eating them denotes losses.

_Blackboard_.

To see in your dreams writing in white chalk on a blackboard, denotes ill
tidings of some person prostrated with some severe malady, or your financial
security will be swayed by the panicky condition of commerce.

_Blacksmith_.

To see a blacksmith in a dream, means laborious undertakings will soon work
to your advantage.

_Bladder_.

To dream of your bladder, denotes you will have heavy trouble in your business
if you are not careful of your health and the way you spend your energies.

To see children blowing up bladders, foretells your expectations
will fail to give you much comfort.

_Blanket_.

Blankets in your dream means treachery if soiled.  If new and white,
success where failure is feared, and a fatal sickness will be avoided
through unseen agencies.

_Blasphemy_.[22]

Blasphemy, denotes an enemy creeping into your life, who under assumed
friendship will do you great harm.

To dream you are cursing yourself, means evil fortune.
To dream you are cursed by others, signifies relief through
affection and prosperity.

The interpretation of this dream here given is not satisfactory.


[22] See Profanity.

_Bleating_.

To hear young animals bleating in your dreams, foretells that you will have
new duties and cares, though not necessarily unpleasant ones.

_Bleeding_.

To dream of bleeding, denotes death by horrible accidents and malicious
reports about you.  Fortune will turn against you.

_Blind_.

To dream of being blind, denotes a sudden change from affluence
to almost abject poverty.

To see others blind, denotes that some worthy person will call
on you for aid.

_Blindfold_.

For a woman to dream that she is blindfolded, means that disturbing
elements are rising around to distress and trouble her.
Disappointment will be felt by others through her.

_Blind Man's Buff_.

To dream that you are playing at blind man's buff, denotes that you are
about to engage in some weak enterprise which will likely humiliate you,
besides losing money for you.

_Blood_.

Blood-stained garments, indicate enemies who seek to tear down a successful
career that is opening up before you.

The dreamer should beware of strange friendships.

To see blood flowing from a wound, physical ailments and worry.
Bad business caused from disastrous dealings with foreign combines.

To see blood on your hands, immediate bad luck, if not careful
of your person and your own affairs.

_Blood Stone_.

To dream of seeing a blood stone, denotes that you will be unfortunate
in your engagements.  For a young woman to receive one as a gift,
denotes she will suffer estrangement from one friend, but will, by this,
gain one more worthy of her.

_Blossoms_.

To dream of seeing trees and shrubs in blossom, denotes a time
of pleasing prosperity is nearing you.

_Blows_.

Denotes injury to yourself.  If you receive a blow, brain trouble
will threaten you.

If you defend yourself, a rise in business will follow.

_Blotting Paper_.

To dream of using blotting paper, signifies you will be deceived
into the betrayal of secrets which will seriously involve a friend.

To see worn blotting paper, denotes continued disagreements in the home
or among friends.

_Blushing_.

For a young woman to dream of blushing, denotes she will be worried
and humiliated by false accusations.  If she sees others blush,
she will be given to flippant railery which will make her unpleasing
to her friends.

_Boarding House_.

To dream of a boarding house, foretells that you will suffer
entanglement and disorder in your enterprises, and you are likely
to change your residence.

_Boa-Constrictor_.

To dream of this is just about the same as to dream of the devil; it indicates
stormy times and much bad fortune.  Disenchantment with humanity will follow.
To kill one is good.

_Boasting_.

To hear boasting in your dreams, you will sincerely regret
an impulsive act, which will cause trouble to your friends.
To boast to a competitor, foretells that you will be unjust,
and will use dishonest means to overcome competition.

_Boat_.

Boat signals forecast bright prospects, if upon clear water.
If the water is unsettled and turbulent, cares and unhappy changes
threaten the dreamer.  If with a gay party you board a boat
without an accident, many favors will be showered upon you.
Unlucky the dreamer who falls overboard while sailing
upon stormy waters.

_Bobbin_.

To dream of bobbins, denotes that important work will devolve on you,
and your interests will be adversely affected if you are negligent
in dispatching the same work.

_Bog_.[23]

Bogs, denotes burdens under whose weight you feel that endeavors
to rise are useless.  Illness and other worries may oppress you.


[23] See Swamp.

_Boiler_.

To dream of seeing a boiler out of repair, signifies you
will suffer from bad management or disappointment.
For a woman to dream that she goes into a cellar to see about
a boiler foretells that sickness and losses will surround her.

_Boils_.

To dream of a boil running pus and blood, you will have unpleasant things
to meet in your immediate future.  May be that the insincerity of friends
will cause you great inconvenience.

To dream of boils on your forehead, is significant of the sickness
of some one near you.

_Bolts_.

To dream of bolts, signifies that formidable obstacles will
oppose your progress.

If the bolts are old or broken, your expectations will be
eclipsed by failures.

_Bomb Shell_.

To dream of bomb shells, foretells anger and disputes, ending in law suits.
Many displeasing incident{s?} follow this dream.

_Bones_.

To see your bones protruding from the flesh, denotes that treachery
is working to ensnare you.

To see a pile of bones, famine and contaminating influences surround you.

_Bonnet_.

Bonnet, denotes much gossiping and slanderous insinuations,
from which a woman should carefully defend herself.

For a man to see a woman tying her bonnet, denotes unforeseen
good luck near by.  His friends will be faithful and true.

A young woman is likely to engage in pleasant and harmless flirtations
if her bonnet is new and of any color except black.

Black bonnets, denote false friends of the opposite sex.

_Books_.

Pleasant pursuits, honor and riches to dream of studying them.
For an author to dream of his works going to press, is a dream of caution;
he will have much trouble in placing them before the public.

To dream of spending great study and time in solving some
intricate subjects, and the hidden meaning of learned authors,
is significant of honors well earned.

To see children at their books, denotes harmony and good conduct
of the young.

To dream of old books, is a warning to shun evil in any form.

_Bookcase_.

To see a bookcase in your dreams, signifies that you
will associate knowledge with your work and pleasure.
Empty bookcases, imply that you will be put out because of lack
of means or facility for work.

_Book Store_.

To visit a book store in your dream, foretells you will be filled
with literary aspirations, which will interfere with your other
works and labors.

_Boots_.

To see your boots on another, your place will be usurped in the affections
of your sweetheart.

To wear new boots, you will be lucky in your dealings.
Bread winners will command higher wages.

Old and torn boots, indicate sickness and snares before you.

_Borrowing_.

Borrowing is a sign of loss and meagre support.
For a banker to dream of borrowing from another bank,
a run on his own will leave him in a state of collapse,
unless he accepts this warning.  If another borrows from you,
help in time of need will be extended or offered you.
True friends will attend you.

_Bosom_.

For a young woman to dream that her bosom is wounded, foretells that some
affliction is threatening her.

To see it soiled or shrunken, she will have a great
disappointment in love and many rivals will vex her.
If it is white and full she is soon to be possessed of fortune.
If her lover is slyly observing it through her sheer corsage,
she is about to come under the soft persuasive influence
of a too ardent wooer.

_Bottles_.

Bottles are good to dream of if well filled with transparent liquid.
You will overcome all obstacles in affairs of the heart,
prosperous engagements will ensue.  If empty, coming trouble
will envelop you in meshes of sinister design, from which you
will be forced to use strategy to disengage yourself.

_Bouquet_.

To dream of a bouquet beautifully and richly colored, denotes a legacy
from some wealthy and unknown relative; also, pleasant, joyous gatherings
among young folks.

To see a withered bouquet, signifies sickness and death.

_Bow and Arrow_.

Bow and arrow in a dream, denotes great gain reaped from the inability
of others to carry out plans.

To make a bad shot means disappointed hopes in carrying forward
successfully business affairs.

_Box_.

Opening a goods box in your dream, signifies untold wealth and that
delightful journeys to distant places may be made with happy results.
If the box is empty disappointment in works of all kinds will follow.

To see full money boxes, augurs cessation from business cares
and a pleasant retirement.

_Bracelet_.

To see in your dreams a bracelet encircling your arm, the gift of lover
or friend, is assurance of an early marriage and a happy union.

If a young woman lose her bracelet she will meet with sundry
losses and vexations.

To find one, good property will come into her possession.

_Brain_.

To see your own brain in a dream, denotes uncongenial surroundings
will irritate and dwarf you into an unpleasant companion.
To see the brains of animals, foretells that you will
suffer mental trouble.

If you eat them, you will gain knowledge, and profit unexpectedly.

_Brambles_.

To dream of brambles entangling you, is a messenger of evil.
Law suits will go against you, and malignant sickness attack you,
or some of your family.


Back to Full Books