10,000 Dreams Interpreted [Or. . ."What's In A Dream"] [Or. . .Dreams, Their Scientific and Practical Interpretations]

_Brandy_.

To dream of brandy, foretells that while you may reach heights of distinction
and wealth, you will lack that innate refinement which wins true friendship
from people whom you most wish to please.

_Branch_.

It betokens, if full of fruit and green leaves, wealth, many delightful
hours with friends.  If they are dried, sorrowful news of the absent.

_Brass_.

To dream of brass, denotes that you will rise rapidly in your profession,
but while of apparently solid elevation you will secretly fear
a downfall of fortune.

_Bray_.

Hearing an ass bray, is significant of unwelcome tidings or intrusions.

_Bread_.[24]

For a woman to dream of eating bread, denotes that she will be afflicted
with children of stubborn will, for whom she will spend many days of useless
labor and worry.

To dream of breaking bread with others, indicates an assured
competence through life.

To see a lot of impure bread, want and misery will burden the dreamer.
If the bread is good and you have access to it, it is a favorable dream.


[24] See Baking and Crust.

_Break_.

Breakage is a bad dream.  To dream of breaking any of your limbs,
denotes bad management and probable failures.  To break furniture,
denotes domestic quarrels and an unquiet state of the mind.

To break a window, signifies bereavement.  To see a broken ring
order will be displaced by furious and dangerous uprisings,
such as jealous contentions often cause.

_Breakfast_.[25]

Is favorable to persons engaged in mental work.  To see a breakfast
of fresh milk and eggs and a well filled dish of ripe fruit,
indicates hasty, but favorable changes.

If you are eating alone, it means you will fall into your enemies' trap.
If you are eating with others it is good.


[25] See Meals.

_Breath_.

To come close to a person in your dreaming with a pure and sweet breath,
commendable will be your conduct, and a profitable consummation of business
deals will follow.

Breath if fetid, indicates sickness and snares.

Losing one's breath, denotes signal failure where success seemed assured.

_Brewing_.

To dream of being in a vast brewing establishment, means unjust
persecution by public officials, but you will eventually prove
your innocence and will rise far above your persecutors.

Brewing in any way in your dreams, denotes anxiety at the outset,
but usually ends in profit and satisfaction.

_Briars_.

To see yourself caught among briars, black enemies are weaving cords of
calumny and perjury intricately around you and will cause you great distress,
but if you succeed in disengaging yourself from the briars, loyal friends
will come to your assistance in every emergency.

_Brick_.

Brick in a dream, indicates unsettled business and disagreements
in love affairs.  To make them you will doubtless fail in your
efforts to amass great wealth.

_Bride_.[26]

For a young woman to dream that she is a bride, foretells that
she will shortly come into an inheritance which will please
her exceedingly, if she is pleased in making her bridal toilet.
If displeasure is felt she will suffer disappointments
in her anticipations.

To dream that you kiss a bride, denotes a happy reconciliation
between friends.  For a bride to kiss others, foretells for you many
friends and pleasures; to kiss you, denotes you will enjoy health
and find that your sweetheart will inherit unexpected fortune.

To kiss a bride and find that she looks careworn and ill,
denotes you will be displeased with your success and the action
of your friends.

If a bride dreams that she is indifferent to her husband, it foretells
that many unhappy circumstances will pollute her pleasures.


[26] See Wedding.

_Bridge_.

To see a long bridge dilapidated, and mysteriously winding
into darkness, profound melancholy over the loss of dearest
possessions and dismal situations will fall upon you.
To the young and those in love, disappointment in the heart's
fondest hopes, as the loved one will fall below your ideal.

To cross a bridge safely, a final surmounting of difficulties,
though the means seem hardly safe to use.  Any obstacle
or delay denotes disaster.

To see a bridge give way before you, beware of treachery and false admirers.
Affluence comes with clear waters.  Sorrowful returns of best efforts are
experienced after looking upon or coming in contact with muddy or turbid
water in dreams.

_Bridle_.

To dream of a bridle, denotes you will engage in some enterprise which will
afford much worry, but will eventually terminate in pleasure and gain.
If it is old or broken you will have difficulties to encounter,
and the probabilities are that you will go down before them.

A blind bridle signifies you will be deceived by some wily enemy,
or some woman will entangle you in an intrigue.

_Bridle Bits_.

To see bridle bits in your dreams, foretells you will subdue
and overcome any obstacle opposing your advancement or happiness.
If they break or are broken you will be surprised into making
concessions to enemies,

_Brimstone_.

To dream of brimstone, foretells that discreditable dealings will lose
you many friends.  if you fail to rectify the mistakes you are making.

To see fires of brimstone, denotes you will be threatened with loss
by contagion in your vicinity.

_Bronchitis_.

To dream that you are affected with bronchitis, foretells you will be detained
from pursuing your views and plans by unfortunate complications of sickness
in your home.

To suffer with bronchitis in a dream, denotes that discouraging prospects
of winning desired objects will soon loom up before you.

_Bronze_.

For a woman to dream of a bronze statue, signifies that she will fail
in her efforts to win the person she has determined on for a husband.

If the statue simulates life, or moves, she will be
involved in a love affair, but no marriage will occur.
Disappointment to some person may follow the dream.

To dream of bronze serpents or insects, foretells you will be pursued
by envy and ruin.  To see bronze metals, denotes your fortune will be
uncertain and unsatisfactory.

_Brood_.

To see a fowl with her brood, denotes that, if you are a woman,
your cares will be varied and irksome.  Many children will be
in your care, and some of them will prove wayward and unruly.

Brood, to others, denotes accumulation of wealth.

_Broom_.

To dream of brooms, denotes thrift and rapid improvement in
your fortune, if the brooms are new.  If they are seen in use,
you will lose in speculation.  For a woman to lose a broom,
foretells that she will prove a disagreeable and slovenly
wife and housekeeper.

_Broth_.

Broth denotes the sincerity of friends.  They will uphold you in
all instances.  If you need pecuniary aid it will be forthcoming.
To lovers, it promises a strong and lasting attachment.

To make broth, you will rule your own and others' fate.

_Brothel_.

To dream of being in a brothel, denotes you will encounter disgrace
through your material indulgence.

_Brothers_.

To see your brothers, while dreaming, full of energy, you will
have cause to rejoice at your own, or their good fortune;
but if they are poor and in distress, or begging for assistance,
you will be called to a deathbed soon, or some dire loss will
overwhelm you or them.

_Brush_.

To dream of using a hair-brush, denotes you will suffer
misfortune from your mismanagement.  To see old hair brushes,
denotes sickness and ill health.  To see clothes brushes,
indicates a heavy task is pending over you.

If you are busy brushing your clothes, you will soon receive reimbursement
for laborious work.  To see miscellaneous brushes, foretells a varied line
of work, yet withal, rather pleasing and remunerative.

_Buckle_.

To dream of buckles, foretells that you will be beset with invitations to
places of pleasure, and your affairs will be in danger of chaotic confusion.

_Buffalo_.

If a woman dreams that she kills a lot of buffaloes, she will
undertake a stupendous enterprise, but by enforcing will power
and leaving off material pleasures, she will win commendation
from men, and may receive long wished for favors.  Buffalo, seen in
a dream, augurs obstinate and powerful but stupid enemies.
They will boldly declare against you but by diplomacy you
will escape much misfortune.

_Bugle_.

To hear joyous blasts from a bugle, prepare for some unusual happiness,
as a harmony of good things for you is being formed by unseen powers.

Blowing a bugle, denotes fortunate dealings.

_Bugs_.

To dream of bugs denotes that some disgustingly revolting complications
will rise in your daily life.  Families will suffer from the carelessness
of servants, and sickness may follow.

_Buildings_.

To see large and magnificent buildings, with green lawns stretching
out before them, is significant of a long life of plenty, and travels
and explorations into distant countries.

Small and newly built houses, denote happy homes and
profitable undertakings; but, if old and filthy buildings,
ill health and decay of love and business will follow.

_Bull_.

To see one pursuing you, business trouble, through envious
and jealous competitors, will harass you.

If a young woman meets a bull, she will have an offer of marriage, but,
by declining this offer, she will better her fortune.

To see a bull goring a person, misfortune from unwisely using
another's possessions will overtake you.

To dream of a white bull, denotes that you will lift yourself
up to a higher plane of life than those who persist in making
material things their God.  It usually denotes gain.

_Bulldog_.[27]

To dream of entering strange premises and have a bulldog attack you,
you will be in danger of transgressing the laws of your country by using
perjury to obtain your desires.

If one meets you in a friendly way, you will rise in life, regardless of
adverse criticisms and seditious interference of enemies.


[27] See Dog.

_Bullock_.[28]

Denotes that kind friends will surround you, if you are in danger
from enemies.  Good health is promised you.


[28] See Bull.

_Burden_.

To dream that you carry a heavy burden, signifies that you
will be tied down by oppressive weights of care and injustice,
caused from favoritism shown your enemies by those in power.
But to struggle free from it, you will climb to the topmost
heights of success.

_Burr_.

To dream of burrs, denotes that you will struggle to free self from
some unpleasant burden, and will seek a change of surroundings.

_Burglars_.

To dream that they are searching your person, you will have dangerous
enemies to contend with, who will destroy you if extreme carefulness
is not practised in your dealings with strangers.

If you dream of your home, or place of business, being burglarized,
your good standing in business or society will be assailed,
but courage in meeting these difficulties will defend you.
Accidents may happen to the careless after this dream.

_Burial_.[29]

To attend the burial of a relative, if the sun is shining
on the procession, is a sign of the good health of relations,
and perhaps the happy marriage of some one of them is about to occur.
But if rain and dismal weather prevails, sickness and bad news
of the absent will soon come, and depressions in business circles
will be felt

A burial where there are sad rites performed, or sorrowing faces,
is indicative of adverse surroundings or their speedy approach.


[29] See Funeral.

_Buried Alive_.

To dream that you are buried alive.  denotes that you are about to make
a great mistake, which your opponents will quickly turn to your injury.
If you are rescued from the grave, your struggle will eventually
correct your misadventure.

_Burns_.

Burns stand for tidings of good.  To burn your hand in a clear and
flowing fire, denotes purity of purpose and the approbation of friends.
To burn your feet in walking through coals, or beds of fire, denotes your
ability to accomplish any endeavor, however impossible it may be to others.
Your usual good health will remain with you, but, if you are overcome
in the fire, it represents that your interests will suffer through treachery
of supposed friends.

_Butcher_.

To see them slaughtering cattle and much blood, you may expect long
and fatal sickness in your family.  To see a butcher cutting meat,
your character will be dissected by society to your detriment.
Beware of writing letters or documents.

_Butter_.

To dream of eating fresh, golden butter, is a sign of good health
and plans well carried out; it will bring unto you possessions,
wealth and knowledge.

To eat rancid butter, denotes a competency acquired through struggles
of manual labor.

To sell butter, denotes small gain.

_Butterfly_.

To see a butterfly among flowers and green grasses, indicates prosperity
and fair attainments.

To see them flying about, denotes news from absent friends by letter,
or from some one who has seen them.  To a young woman, a happy love,
culminating in a life union.

_Buttons_.

To dream of sewing bright shining buttons on a uniform, betokens to a young
woman the warm affection of a fine looking and wealthy partner in marriage.
To a youth, it signifies admittance to military honors and a bright career.

Dull, or cloth buttons, denotes disappointments and systematic losses
and ill health.

The loss of a button, and the consequent anxiety as to losing a garment,
denotes prospective losses in trade.

_Buttermilk_.

Drinking buttermilk, denotes sorrow will follow some worldly pleasure,
and some imprudence will impair the general health of the dreamer.

To give it away, or feed it to pigs, is bad still.

To dream that you are drinking buttermilk made into
oyster soup, denotes that you will be called on to do some
very repulsive thing, and ill luck will confront you.
There are quarrels brewing and friendships threatened.
If you awaken while you are drinking it, by discreet maneuvering
you may effect a pleasant understanding of disagreements.

_Buzzard_.

To dream that you hear a buzzard talking, foretells that some old scandal
will arise and work you injury by your connection with it.

To see one sitting on a railroad, denotes some accident or loss
is about to descend upon you.  To see them fly away as you approach,
foretells that you will be able to smooth over some scandalous
disagreement among your friends, or even appertaining to yourself.

To see buzzards in a dream, portends generally salacious gossip
or that unusual scandal will disturb you.



C.

``_And the Angel of God spake unto me in a dream, saying, Jacob; and I said,
here am I_.''--Gen. xxx., II.


_Cab_.

To ride in a cab in dreams, is significant of pleasant avocations,
and average prosperity you will enjoy.

To ride in a cab at night, with others, indicates that you will have a secret
that you will endeavor to keep from your friends.

To ride in a cab with a woman, scandal will couple your name
with others of bad repute.

To dream of driving a public cab, denotes manual labor,
with little chance of advancement.

_Cabbage_.

It is bad to dream of cabbage.  Disorders may run riot in all forms.
To dream of seeing cabbage green, means unfaithfulness in love
and infidelity in wedlock.

To cut heads of cabbage, denotes that you are tightening the cords
of calamity around you by lavish expenditure.

_Cable_.

To dream of a cable, foretells the undertaking of a decidedly
hazardous work, which, if successfully carried to completion,
will abound in riches and honor to you.

To dream of receiving cablegrams, denotes that a message of importance
will reach you soon, and will cause disagreeable comments.

_Cabin_.

The cabin of a ship is rather unfortunate to be in in{sic} a dream.
Some mischief is brewing for you.  You will most likely be engaged in a
law suit, in which you will lose from the unstability of your witness.

For log cabin, see house.

_Cackle_.

To hear the cackling of hens denotes a sudden shock produced
by the news of an unexpected death in your neighborhood,
Sickness will cause poverty.

_Cage_.

In your dreaming if you see a cageful of birds, you will be the happy
possessor of immense wealth and many beautiful and charming children.
To see only one bird, you will contract a desirable and wealthy marriage.
No bird indicates a member of the family lost, either by elopement or death.

To see wild animals caged, denotes that you will triumph over
your enemies and misfortunes.  If you are in the cage with them,
it denotes harrowing scenes from accidents while traveling.

_Cakes_.

Batter or pancakes, denote that the affections of the dreamer are well placed,
and a home will be bequeathed to him or her.

To dream of sweet cakes, is gain for the laboring and a favorable
opportunity for the enterprising.  Those in love will prosper.

Pound cake is significant of much pleasure either from society or business.
For a young woman to dream of her wedding cake is the only bad luck cake
in the category.  Baking them is not so good an omen as seeing them
or eating them.

_Calomel_.

To dream of calomel shows some person is seeking to deceive
and injure you through the unconscious abetting of friends.
For a young woman to dream of taking it, foretells that she will be
victimized through the artful designing of persons whom she trusts.
If it is applied externally, she will close her eyes to deceit
in order to enjoy a short season of pleasure.

_Calves_.[30]

To dream of calves peacefully grazing on a velvety lawn,
foretells to the young, happy, festive gatherings and enjoyment.
Those engaged in seeking wealth will see it rapidly increasing.


[30] See Cattle.

_Called_.

To hear your name called in a dream by strange voices,
denotes that your business will fall into a precarious state,
and that strangers may lend you assistance, or you may fail
to meet your obligations.

To hear the voice of a friend or relative, denotes the desperate
illness of some one of them, and may be death; in the latter
case you may be called upon to stand as guardian over some one,
in governing whom you should use much discretion.

Lovers hearing the voice of their affianced should heed the warning.
If they have been negligent in attention they should make amends.
Otherwise they may suffer separation from misunderstanding.

To hear the voice of the dead may be a warning of your own serious
illness or some business worry from bad judgment may ensue.
The voice is an echo thrown back from the future on the subjective mind,
taking the sound of your ancestor's voice from coming in contact
with that part of your ancestor which remains with you.
A certain portion of mind matter remains the same in lines
of family descent.

_Calendar_.

To dream of keeping a calendar, indicates that you will be very orderly
and systematic in habits throughout the year.

To see a calendar, denotes disappointment in your calculations.

_Calm_.

To see calm seas, denotes successful ending of doubtful undertaking.

To feel calm and happy, is a sign of a long and well-spent life
and a vigorous old age.

_Calumny_.

To dream that you are the subject of calumny, denotes that your
interests will suffer at the hands of evil-minded gossips.
For a young woman, it warns her to be careful of her conduct,
as her movements are being critically observed by persons
who claim to be her friends.

_Camera_.

To dream of a camera, signifies that changes will bring
undeserved environments.  For a young woman to dream that she
is taking pictures with a camera, foretells that her immediate
future will have much that is displeasing and that a friend
will subject her to acute disappointment.

_Cameo Brooch_.

To dream of a cameo brooch, denotes some sad occurrence will soon
claim your attention.

_Camels_.

To see this beast of burden, signifies that you will entertain
great patience and fortitude in time of almost unbearable
anguish and failures that will seemingly sweep every vestige
of hope from you.

To own a camel, is a sign that you will possess rich mining property.

To see a herd of camels on the desert, denotes assistance when all human
aid seems at a low ebb, and of sickness from which you will arise,
contrary to all expectations.

_Camp_.

To dream of camping in the open air, you may expect a change in your affairs,
also prepare to make a long and wearisome journey.

To see a camping settlement, many of your companions will remove
to new estates and your own prospects will appear gloomy.

For a young woman to dream that she is in a camp, denotes that
her lover will have trouble in getting her to name a day
for their wedding, and that he will prove a kind husband.
If in a military camp she will marry the first time she
has a chance.

A married woman after dreaming of being in a soldier's camp
is in danger of having her husband's name sullied, and divorce
courts may be her destination.

_Campaign_.

To dream of making a political one, signifies your opposition to
approved ways of conducting business, and you will set up original
plans for yourself regardless of enemies' working against you.
Those in power will lose.

If it is a religious people conducting a campaign against sin,
it denotes that you will be called upon to contribute from your
private means to sustain charitable institutions.

For a woman to dream that she is interested in a campaign against
fallen women, denotes that she will surmount obstacles and prove
courageous in time of need.

_Cane_.

To see cane growing in your dream, foretells favorable advancement
will be made toward fortune.  To see it cut, denotes absolute failure
in all undertakings.

_Cancer_.

To have one successfully treated in a dream, denotes a sudden
rise from obscure poverty to wealthy surroundings.

To dream of a cancer, denotes illness of some one near you,
and quarrels with those you love.  Depressions may follow
to the man of affairs after this dream.

To dream of a cancer, foretells sorrow in its ugliest phase.
Love will resolve itself into cold formality, and business
will be worrying and profitless.

_Canal_.

To see the water of a canal muddy and stagnant-looking, portends
sickness and disorders of the stomach and dark designs of enemies.
But if its waters are clear a placid life and the devotion of friends
is before you.

For a young woman to glide in a canoe across a canal, denotes a chaste life
and an adoring husband.  If she crossed the canal on a bridge over clear
water and gathers ferns and other greens on the banks, she will enjoy a life
of ceaseless rounds of pleasure and attain to high social distinction.
But if the water be turbid she will often find herself tangled in meshes
of perplexity and will be the victim of nervous troubles.

_Canary Birds_.  To dream of this sweet songster, denotes
unexpected pleasures.  For the young to dream of possessing
a beautiful canary, denotes high class honors and a successful
passage through the literary world, or a happy termination
of love's young dream.

To dream one is given you, indicates a welcome legacy.
To give away a canary, denotes that you will suffer disappointment
in your dearest wishes.

To dream that one dies, denotes the unfaithfulness of dear friends.

Advancing, fluttering, and singing canaries, in luxurious apartments,
denotes feasting and a life of exquisite refinement,
wealth, and satisfying friendships.  If the light is weird
or unnaturally bright, it augurs that you are entertaining
illusive hopes.  Your over-confidence is your worst enemy.
A young woman after this dream should beware, lest flattering
promises react upon her in disappointment.  Fairy-like scenes
in a dream are peculiarly misleading and treacherous to women.

_Candles_.

To see them burning with a clear and steady flame, denotes the constancy
of those about you and a well-grounded fortune.

For a maiden to dream that she is molding candles, denotes that she will have
an unexpected offer of marriage and a pleasant visit to distant relatives.
If she is lighting a candle, she will meet her lover clandestinely because
of parental objections.

To see a candle wasting in a draught, enemies are circulating
detrimental reports about you.

To snuff a candle, portends sorowful{sic} news.  Friends are dead
or in distressful straits.

_Candlestick_.

To see a candlestick bearing a whole candle, denotes that a bright future
lies before you filled with health, happiness and loving companions.
If empty, the reverse.

_Canker_.[31]

To dream of seeing canker on anything, is an omen of evil.
It foretells death and treacherous companions for the young.
Sorrow and loneliness to the aged.

Cankerous growths in the flesh, denote future distinctions either
as head of State or stage life.


[31] The last definition is not consistent with other parts of this book,
but I let it stand, as I find it among my automatic writings.


_Cannon_.

This dream denotes that one's home and country are in danger
of foreign intrusion, from which our youth will suffer from
the perils of war.

For a young woman to hear or see cannons, denotes she will be a soldier's wife
and will have to bid him godspeed as he marches in defense of her and honor.

The reader will have to interpret dreams of this character
by the influences surrounding him, and by the experiences stored
away in his subjective mind.  If you have thought about cannons
a great deal and you dream of them when there is no war, they are
most likely to warn you against struggle and probable defeat.
Or if business is manipulated by yourself successful engagements
after much worry and ill luck may ensue.

_Cannon-Ball_.

This means that secret enemies are uniting against you.  For a maid
to see a cannon-ball, denotes that she will have a soldier sweetheart.
For a youth to see a cannon-ball, denotes that he will be called upon
to defend his country.

_Canoe_.

To paddle a canoe on a calm stream, denotes your perfect confidence
in your own ability to conduct your business in a profitable way.

To row with a sweetheart, means an early marriage and fidelity.
To row on rough waters you will have to tame a shrew before you
attain connubial bliss.  Affairs in the business world will
prove disappointing after you dream of rowing in muddy waters.
If the waters are shallow and swift, a hasty courtship or stolen pleasures,
from which there can be no lasting good, are indicated.

Shallow, clear and calm waters in rowing, signifies happiness
of a pleasing character, but of short duration.

Water is typical of futurity in the dream realms.  If a pleasant immediate
future awaits the dreamer he will come in close proximity with clear water.
Or if he emerges from disturbed watery elements into waking life the near
future is filled with crosses for him.

_Candy_.

To dream of making candy, denotes profit accruing from industry.

To dream of eating crisp, new candy, implies social
pleasures and much love-making among the young and old.
Sour candy is a sign of illness or that disgusting annoyances
will grow out of confidences too long kept.

To receive a box of bonbons, signifies to a young person
that he or she will be the recipient of much adulation.
It generally means prosperity.  If you send a box you will make
a proposition, but will meet with disappointment.

_Canopy_.

To dream of a canopy or of being beneath one, denotes that false
friends are influencing you to undesirable ways of securing gain.
You will do well to protect those in your care.

_Cap_.

For a woman to dream of seeing a cap, she will be invited to take
part in some festivity.

For a girl to dream that she sees her sweetheart with a cap on,
denotes that she will be bashful and shy in his presence.

To see a prisoner's cap, denotes that your courage is failing
you in time of danger.

To see a miner's cap, you will inherit a substantial competency.

_Captive_.

To dream that you are a captive, denotes that you may have treachery
to deal with, and if you cannot escape, that injury and misfortune
will befall you.

To dream of taking any one captive, you will join yourself to pursuits
and persons of lowest status.

For a young woman to dream that she is a captive, denotes that she
will have a husband who will be jealous of her confidence in others;
or she may be censured for her indiscretion.

_Captain_.

To dream of seeing a captain of any company, denotes your noblest aspirations
will be realized.  If a woman dreams that her lover is a captain, she will
be much harassed in mind from jealousy and rivalry.

_Cars_.

To dream of seeing cars, denotes journeying and changing in quick succession.
To get on one shows that travel which you held in contemplation will be made
under different auspices than had been calculated upon.

To miss one, foretells that you will be foiled in an attempt
to forward your prospects.

To get off of one, denotes that you will succeed with some interesting
schemes which will fill you with self congratulations.

To dream of sleeping-cars, indicates that your struggles to amass
wealth is animated by the desire of gratifying selfish and lewd
principles which should be mastered and controlled.

To see street-cars in your dreams, denotes that some person is actively
interested in causing you malicious trouble and disquiet.

To ride on a car, foretells that rivalry and jealousy will
enthrall your happiness.

To stand on the platform of a street-car while it is running, denotes you
will attempt to carry on an affair which will be extremely dangerous,
but if you ride without accident you will be successful.

If the platform is up high, your danger will be more apparent,
but if low, you will barely accomplish your purpose.

_Cardinal_.

It is unlucky to dream you see a cardinal in his robes.
You will meet such misfortunes as will necessitate your removal
to distant or foreign lands to begin anew your ruined fortune.
For a woman to dream this is a sign of her downfall through
false promises.  If priest or preacher is a spiritual adviser
and his services are supposed to be needed, especially in
the hour of temptation, then we find ourselves dreaming of him
as a warning against approaching evil.

_Cards_.

If playing them in your dreams with others for social pastime, you will
meet with fair realization of hopes that have long buoyed you up.
Small ills will vanish.  But playing for stakes will involve you
in difficulties of a serious nature.

If you lose at cards you will encounter enemies.
If you win you will justify yourself in the eyes of the law,
but will have trouble in so doing.

If a young woman dreams that her sweetheart is playing at cards,
she will have cause to question his good intentions.

In social games, seeing diamonds indicate wealth; clubs, that your partner
in life will be exacting, and that you may have trouble in explaining
your absence at times; hearts denote fidelity and cosy surroundings;
spades signify that you will be a widow and encumbered with a large estate.

_Carnival_.

To dream that you are participating in a carnival, portends that you are soon
to enjoy some unusual pleasure or recreation.  A carnival when masks are used,
or when incongruous or clownish figures are seen, implies discord in the home;
business will be unsatisfactory and love unrequited.

_Cart_.

To dream of riding in a cart, ill luck and constant work will employ
your time if you would keep supplies for your family.

To see a cart, denotes bad news from kindred or friends.

To dream of driving a cart, you will meet with merited success
in business and other aspirations.

For lovers to ride together in a cart, they will be true in spite
of the machinations of rivals.

_Cartridge_.

To dream of cartridges, foretells unhappy quarrels and dissensions.

Some untoward fate threatens you or some one closely allied to you.

If they are empty, there will be foolish variances in your associations.

_Carving_.

To dream of carving a fowl, indicates you will be poorly off
in a worldly way.  Companions will cause you vexation from
continued ill temper.

Carving meat, denotes bad investments, but, if a change is made,
prospects will be brighter.

_Carpet_.

To see a carpet in a dream, denotes profit, and wealthy friends
to aid you in need.

To walk on a carpet, you will be prosperous and happy.

To dream that you buy carpets, denotes great gain.
If selling them, you will have cause to go on a pleasant journey,
as well as a profitable one.

For a young woman to dream of carpets, shows she will own a beautiful
home and servants will wait upon her.

_Carpenter_.

To see carpenters at their labor, foretells you will engage in honest
endeavors to raise your fortune, to the exclusion of selfish pastime
or so-called recreation.

_Carriage_.

To see a carriage, implies that you will be gratified, and that you
will make visits.

To ride in one, you will have a sickness that will soon pass,
and you will enjoy health and advantageous positions.

To dream that you are looking for a carriage, you will have to labor hard,
but will eventually be possessed with a fair competency.

_Carrot_.

To dream of carrots, portends prosperity and health For a young
woman to eat them, denotes that she will contract an early marriage
and be the mother of several hardy children.

_Cask_.

To see one filled, denotes prosperous times and feastings.
If empty, your life will be void of any joy or consolation
from outward influences.

_Cash_.[32]

To dream that you have plenty of cash, but that it has been borrowed,
portends that you will be looked upon as a worthy man, but that those who come
in close contact with you will find that you are mercenary and unfeeling.

For a young woman to dream that she is spending borrowed money,
foretells that she will be found out in her practice of deceit,
and through this lose a prized friend.


[32] See Money.

_Cash Box_.

To dream of a full cash box, denotes that favorable prospects will open
around you.  If empty, you will experience meager reimbursements.

_Cashier_.

To see a cashier in your dream, denotes that others will claim
your possessions.  If you owe any one, you will practice deceit
in your designs upon some wealthy person.

_Castle_.

To dream of being in a castle, you will be possessed of sufficient wealth
to make life as you wish.  You have prospects of being a great traveler,
enjoying contact with people of many nations.

To see an old and vine-covered castle, you are likely to become
romantic in your tastes, and care should be taken that you
do not contract an undesirable marriage or engagement.
Business is depressed after this dream.

To dream that you are leaving a castle, you will be robbed of
your possessions, or lose your lover or some dear one by death.

_Castor Oil_.

To dream of castor oil, denotes that you will seek to overthrow
a friend who is secretly abetting your advancement.

_Castoria_.

To dream of castoria, denotes that you will fail to discharge
some important duty, and your fortune will seemingly decline
to low stages.

_Cats_.

To dream of a cat, denotes ill luck, if you do not succeed
in killing it or driving it from your sight.  If the cat
attacks you, you will have enemies who will go to any extreme
to blacken your reputation and to cause you loss of property.
But if you succeed in banishing it, you will overcome great
obstacles and rise in fortune and fame.

If you meet a thin, mean and dirty-looking cat, you will have
bad news from the absent.  Some friend lies at death's door;
but if you chase it out of sight, your friend will recover
after a long and lingering sickness.

To hear the scream or the mewing of a cat, some false friend is using
all the words and work at his command to do you harm.

To dream that a cat scratches you, an enemy will succeed in wrenching
from you the profits of a deal that you have spent many days making.

If a young woman dreams that she is holding a cat, or kitten, she will be
influenced into some impropriety through the treachery of others.

To dream of a clean white cat, denotes entanglements which,
while seemingly harmless, will prove a source of sorrow and
loss of wealth.

When a merchant dreams of a cat, he should put his best energies to work,
as his competitors are about to succeed in demolishing his standard
of dealing, and he will be forced to other measures if he undersells
others and still succeeds.

To dream of seeing a cat and snake on friendly terms signifies
the beginning of an angry struggle.  It denotes that an enemy
is being entertained by you with the intention of using him
to find out some secret which you believe concerns yourself;
uneasy of his confidences given, you will endeavor to disclaim all
knowledge of his actions, as you are fearful that things divulged,
concerning your private life, may become public.

_Catechism_.

To dream of the catechism, foretells that you will be offered
a lucrative position, but the strictures will be such that you
will be worried as to accepting it.

_Caterpillar_.

To see a caterpillar in a dream, denotes that low
and hypocritical people are in your immediate future,
and you will do well to keep clear of deceitful appearances.
You may suffer a loss in love or business.

To dream of a caterpillar, foretells you will be placed in
embarrassing situations, and there will be small honor or gain
to be expected.

_Cattle_.[33]

To dream of seeing good-looking and fat cattle contentedly
grazing in green pastures, denotes prosperity and happiness
through a congenial and pleasant companion.

To see cattle lean and shaggy, and poorly fed, you will be likely to toil
all your life because of misspent energy and dislike of details of work.
Correct your habits after this dream.

To see cattle stampeding, means that you will have to exert all the powers
of command you have to keep your career in a profitable channel.

To see a herd of cows at milking time, you will be the
successful owner of wealth that many have worked to obtain.
To a young woman this means that her affections will not suffer
from the one of her choice.

To dream of milking cows with udders well filled, great good fortune
is in store for you.  If the calf has stolen the milk, it signifies that
you are about to lose your lover by slowness to show your reciprocity,
or your property from neglect of business.

To see young calves in your dream, you will become a great
favorite in society and win the heart of a loyal person.
For business, this dream indicates profit from sales.
For a lover, the entering into bonds that will be respected.
If the calves are poor, look for about the same, except that
the object sought will be much harder to obtain.

Long-horned and dark, vicious cattle, denote enemies.

[33] See Calves.

_Cathedral_.

To dream of a wast cathedral with its domes rising into space,
denotes that you will be possessed with an envious nature and
unhappy longings for the unattainable, both mental and physical;
but if you enter you will be elevated in life, having for your
companions the learned and wise.

_Cauliflower_.

To dream of eating it, you will be taken to task for neglect of duty.
To see it growing, your prospects will brighten after a period of loss.

For a young woman to see this vegetable in a garden, denotes that she
will marry to please her parents and not herself.

_Cavalry_.

To dream that you see a division of cavalry, denotes personal advancement
and distinction.  Some little sensation may accompany your elevation.

_Cavern or Cave_.

To dream of seeing a cavern yawning in the weird moonlight before you,
many perplexities will assail you, and doubtful advancement because
of adversaries.  Work and health is threatened.

To be in a cave foreshadows change.  You will probably be estranged
from those who are very dear to you.

For a young woman to walk in a cave with her lover or friend,
denotes she will fall in love with a villain and will suffer
the loss of true friends.

_Cedars_.

To dream of seeing them green and shapely, denotes pleasing success
in an undertaking.

To see them dead or blighted, signifies despair.
No object will be attained from seeing them thus.

_Celestial Signs_.[34]

To dream of celestial signs, foretells unhappy occurrences will cause
you to make unseasonable journeys.  Love or business may go awry,
quarrels in the house are also predicted if you are not discreet
with your engagements.


[34] See Illumination.

_Celery_.

To dream of seeing fresh, crisp stalks of celery, you will be prosperous
and influential beyond your highest hopes.

To see it decaying, a death in your family will soon occur.

To eat it, boundless love and affection will be heaped upon you.

For a young woman to eat it with her lover, denotes she will come
into rich possessions.

_Cellar_.

To dream of being in a cold, damp cellar, you will be oppressed by doubts.
You will lose confidence in all things and suffer gloomy forebodings
from which you will fail to escape unless you control your will.
It also indicates loss of property.

To see a cellar stored with wines and table stores, you will
be offered a share in profits coming from a doubtful source.
If a young woman dreams of this she will have an offer of marriage
from a speculator or gambler.

_Cemetery_.

To dream of being in a beautiful and well-kept cemetery, you will have
unexpected news of the recovery of one whom you had mourned as dead,
and you will have your title good to lands occupied by usurpers.

To see an old bramble grown and forgotten cemetery, you will live to see
all your loved ones leave you, and you will be left to a stranger's care.

For young people to dream of wandering through the silent avenues of the dead
foreshows they will meet with tender and loving responses from friends,
but will have to meet sorrows that friends are powerless to avert.

Brides dreaming of passing a cemetery on their way to the wedding ceremony,
will be bereft of their husbands by fatal accidents occurring on journeys.

For a mother to carry fresh flowers to a cemetery, indicates she may expect
the continued good health of her family.

For a young widow to visit a cemetery means she will soon throw aside
her weeds for robes of matrimony.  If she feels sad and depressed she
will have new cares and regrets.

Old people dreaming of a cemetery, shows they will soon make other journeys
where they will find perfect rest.

To see little children gathering flowers and chasing butterflies among
the graves, denotes prosperous changes and no graves of any of your friends
to weep over.  Good health will hold high carnival.

_Chaff_.

To see chaff, denotes an empty and fruitless undertaking and ill health
causing much anxiety.

Women dreaming of piles of chaff, portends many hours spent
in useless and degrading gossip, bringing them into notoriety
and causing them to lose husbands who would have maintained
them without work on their part.

_Chains_.

To dream of being bound in chains, denotes that unjust burdens
are about to be thrown upon your shoulders; but if you succeed
in breaking them you will free yourself from some unpleasant
business or social engagement.

To see chains, brings calumny and treacherous designs of the envious.

Seeing others in chains, denotes bad fortunes for them.

_Chair_.

To see a chair in your dream, denotes failure to meet some obligation.
If you are not careful you will also vacate your most profitable places.

To see a friend sitting on a chair and remaining motionless,
signifies news of his death or illness.

_Chair Maker_.

To dream of seeing a chair maker, denotes that worry from apparently
pleasant labor will confront you.

_Chairman_.

To dream that you see the chairman of any public body, foretells you will
seek elevation and be recompensed by receiving a high position of trust.
To see one looking out of humor you are threatened with unsatisfactory states.

If you are a chairman, you will be distinguished for your justice
and kindness to others.

_Chalk_.

For a woman to dream of chalking her face, denotes that she will scheme
to obtain admirers.

To dream of using chalk on a board, you will attain public honors,
unless it is the blackboard; then it indicates ill luck.

To hold hands full of chalk, disappointment is foretold.

_Chalice_.

To dream of a chalice, denotes pleasure will be gained by you
to the sorrow of others.  To break one foretells your failure
to obtain power over some friend.

_Challenge_.

If you are challenged to fight a duel, you will become involved
in a social difficulty wherein you will be compelled to make
apologies or else lose friendships.

To accept a challenge of any character, denotes that you will bear many ills
yourself in your endeavor to shield others from dishonor.

_Chamber_.

To find yourself in a beautiful and richly furnished chamber implies
sudden fortune, either through legacies from unknown relatives
or through speculation.  For a young woman, it denotes that a
wealthy stranger will offer her marriage and a fine establishment.
If the chamber is plainly furnished, it denotes that a small
competency and frugality will be her portion.

_Chambermaid_.

To see a chambermaid, denotes bad fortune and decided changes
will be made.

For a man to dream of making love to a chambermaid, shows he is likely
to find himself an object of derision on account of indiscreet conduct
and want of tact.

_Chameleon_.

To dream of seeing your swetheart{sic} wearing a chameleon chained to her,
shows she will prove faithless to you if by changing she can better
her fortune.  Ordinarily chameleons signify deceit and self advancement,
even though others suffer.

_Champion_.

To dream of a champion, denotes you will win the warmest friendship
of some person by your dignity and moral conduct.

_Chandelier_.

To dream of a chandelier, portends that unhoped-for success will make
it possible for you to enjoy pleasure and luxury at your caprice.

To see a broken or ill-kept one, denotes that unfortunate
speculation will depress your seemingly substantial fortune.
To see the light in one go out, foretells that sickness and
distress will cloud a promising future.

_Chapel_.

To dream of a chapel, denotes dissension in social circles
and unsettled business.

To be in a chapel, denotes disappointment and change of business.

For young people to dream of entering a chapel, implies false
loves and enemies.  Unlucky unions may entangle them.

_Charity_.

To dream of giving charity, denotes that you will be harassed
with supplications for help from the poor and your business
will be at standstill.

To dream of giving to charitable institutions, your right
of possession to paving property will be disputed.
Worries and ill health will threaten you.

For young persons to dream of giving charity, foreshows they will be
annoyed by deceitful rivals.  To dream that you are an object of charity,
omens that you will succeed in life after hard times with misfortunes.

_Charcoal_.

To dream of charcoal unlighted, denotes miserable situations
and bleak unhappiness.  If it is burning with glowing coals,
there is prospects of great enhancement of fortune, and possession
of unalloyed joys.

_Chariot_.

To dream of riding in a chariot, foretells that favorable opportunities
will present themselves resulting in your good if rightly used by you.

To fall or see others fall from one, denotes displacement
from high positions.

_Chastise_.

To dream of being chastised, denotes that you have not been prudent
in conducting your affairs.

To dream that you administer chastisement to another, signifies that you
will have an ill-tempered partner either in business or marriage.

For parents to dream of chastising their children, indicates they
will be loose in their manner of correcting them, but they will
succeed in bringing them up honorably.

_Cheated_.

To dream of being cheated in business, you will meet designing people
who will seek to close your avenues to fortune.

For young persons to dream that they are being cheated in games, portend they
will lose their sweethearts through quarrels and misunderstandings.

_Checks_.

To dream of palming off false checks on your friends, denotes that you
will resort to subterfuge in order to carry forward your plans.

To receive checks you will be able to meet your payments
and will inherit money.

To dream that you pay out checks, denotes depression and loss in business.

_Checkers_.

To dream of playing checkers, you will be involved in difficulties
of a serious character, and strange people will come into your life,
working you harm.

To dream that you win the game, you will succeed in some doubtful enterprise.

_Cheese_.

To dream of eating cheese, denotes great disappointments and sorrow.
No good of any nature can be hoped for.  Cheese is generally a bad dream.

_Chemise_.

For a woman to dream of a chemise, denotes she will hear unfavorable
gossip about herself.

_Cherries_.

To dream of cherries, denotes you will gain popularity by your amiability
and unselfishness.  To eat them, portends possession of some much
desired object.  To see green ones, indicates approaching good fortune.

_Cherubs_.

To dream you see cherubs, foretells you will have some distinct joy,
which will leave an impression of lasting good upon your life.

To see them looking sorrowful or reproachful, foretells that distress
will come unexpectedly upon you.

_Chess_.

To dream of playing chess, denotes stagnation of business, dull companions,
and poor health.

To dream that you lose at chess, worries from mean sources will ensue;
but if you win, disagreeable influences may be surmounted.

_Chestnuts_.

To dream of handling chestnuts, foretells losses in a business way,
but indicates an agreeable companion through life.

Eating them, denotes sorrow for a time, but final happiness.

For a young woman to dream of eating or trying her fortune with them,
she will have a well-to-do lover and comparative plenty.

_Chickens_.

To dream of seeing a brood of chickens, denotes worry from many cares,
some of which of which will prove to your profit.

Young or half grown chickens, signify fortunate enterprises,
but to make them so you will have to exert your physical strength.

To see chickens going to roost, enemies are planning to work you evil.

To eat them, denotes that selfishness will detract from your otherwise
good name.  Business and love will remain in precarious states.

_Chiffonier_.

To see or search through a chiffonier, denotes you will
have disappointing anticipations.  To see one in order,
indicates pleasant friends and entertainments.

_Chilblain_.

To dream of suffering with chilblains, denotes that you will be driven
into some bad dealing through over anxity{sic} of a friend or partner.
This dream also portends your own illness or an accident.

_Childbed_.

To dream of giving child birth, denotes fortunate circumstances
and safe delivery of a handsome child.

For an unmarried woman to dream of being in childbed, denotes unhappy
changes from honor to evil and low estates.

_Children_.

          ``Dream of children sweet and fair,
          To you will come suave debonair,
          Fortune robed in shining dress,
          Bearing wealth and happiness.''


To dream of seeing many beautiful children is portentous of great
prosperity and blessings.

For a mother to dream of seeing her child sick from slight cause,
she may see it enjoying robust health, but trifles of another nature
may harass her.

To see children working or studying, denotes peaceful times
and general prosperity.

To dream of seeing your child desperately ill or dead, you have much to fear,
for its welfare is sadly threatened.

To dream of your dead child, denotes worry and disappointment
in the near future.

To dream of seeing disappointed children, denotes trouble from enemies,
and anxious forebodings from underhanded work of seemingly friendly people.

To romp and play with children, denotes that all your speculating
and love enterprises will prevail.

_Chimes_.

To dream of Christmas chimes, denotes fair prospects for business
men and farmers.

For the young, happy anticipations fulfilled.  Ordinary chimes,
denotes some small anxiety will soon be displaced by news
of distant friends.

_Chimney_.

To dream of seeing chimneys, denotes a very displeasing incident will
occur in your life.  Hasty intelligence of sickness will be borne you.
A tumble down chimney, denotes sorrow and likely death in your family.
To see one overgrown with ivy or other vines, foretells that happiness
will result from sorrow or loss of relatives.

To see a fire burning in a chimney, denotes much good is approaching you.
To hide in a chimney corner, denotes distress and doubt will assail you.
Business will appear gloomy.

For a young woman to dream that she is going down a chimney,
foretells she will be guilty of some impropriety which will
cause consternation among her associates.  To ascend a chimney,
shows that she will escape trouble which will be planned for her.

_China_.

For a woman to dream of painting or arranging her china, foretells she
will have a pleasant home and be a thrifty and economical matron.

_China Store_.[35]

For a china merchant to dream that his store looks empty,
foretells he will have reverses in his business, and withal
a gloomy period will follow.


[35] See Crockery.

_Chocolate_.

To dream of chocolate, denotes you will provide abundantly
for those who are dependent on you.  To see chocolate candy,
indicates agreeable companions and employments.
If sour, illness or other disappointments will follow.
To drink chocolate, foretells you will prosper after a short
period of unfavorable reverses.

_Choir_.

To dream of a choir, foretells you may expect cheerful surroundings
to replace gloom and discontent.  For a young woman to sing in a choir,
denotes she will be miserable over the attention paid others by her lover.

_Cholera_.

To dream of this dread disease devastating the country, portends sickness
of virulent type will rage and many disappointments will follow.

To dream that you are attacked by it, denotes your own sickness.

_Christ_.

To dream of beholding Christ, the young child, worshiped by the
wise men, denotes many peaceful days, full of wealth and knowledge,
abundant with joy, and content.

If in the garden of the Gethsemane, sorrowing adversity will fill your soul,
great longings for change and absent objects of love will be felt.

To see him in the temple scourging the traders, denotes that evil
enemies will be defeated and honest endeavors will prevail.

_Christmas Tree_.

To dream of a Christmas tree, denotes joyful occasions and
auspicious fortune.  To see one dismantled, foretells some
painful incident will follow occasions of festivity.

_Chrysanthemum_.

To dream that you gather white chrysanthemums, signifies loss
and much perplexity; colored ones, betokens pleasant engagements.

To see them in bouquets, denotes that love will be offered you,
but a foolish ambition will cause you to put it aside.  To pass down
an avenue of white chrysanthemums, with here and there a yellow one
showing among the white, foretells a strange sense of loss and sadness,
from which the sensibilities will expand and take on new powers.
While looking on these white flowers as you pass, and you suddenly feel
your spirit leave your body and a voice shouts aloud ``Glory to God,
my Creator,'' foretells that a crisis is pending in your near future.
If some of your friends pass out, and others take up true ideas in connection
with spiritual and earthly needs, you will enjoy life in its deepest meaning.
Often death is near you in these dreams.

_Church_.[36]

To dream of seeing a church in the distance, denotes disappointment
in pleasures long anticipated.

To enter one wrapt in gloom, you will participate in a funeral.
Dull prospects of better times are portended.

_Churchyard_.

To dream of walking in a churchyard, if in winter, denotes that you are
to have a long and bitter struggle with poverty, and you will reside far
from the home of your childhood, and friends will be separated from you;
but if you see the signs of springtime, you will walk up in into pleasant
places and enjoy the society of friends.

For lovers to dream of being in a churchyard means they will never marry
each other, but will see others fill their places.

_Churning_.

To dream of churning, you will have difficult tasks set you, but by
diligence and industry you will accomplish them and be very prosperous.
To the farmer, it denotes profit from a plenteous harvest; to a young woman,
it denotes a thrifty and energetic husband.

_Cider_.

To dream of cider, denotes fortune may be won by you if your time
is not squandered upon material pleasure.  To see people drinking it,
you will be under the influence of unfaithful friends.

_Cipher_.

To dream of reading cipher, indicates that you are interested
in literary researches, and by constant study you will become
well acquainted with the habits and lives of the ancients.

_Circle_.

To dream of a circle, denotes that your affairs will deceive you
in their proportions of gain.  For a young woman to dream of a circle,
warns her of indiscreet involvement to the exclusion of marriage.

_Cistern_.  To dream of a cistern, denotes you are in danger
of trespassing upon the pleasures and rights of your friends.
To draw from one, foretells that you will enlarge in your pastime
and enjoyment in a manner which may be questioned by propriety.

To see an empty one, foretells despairing change from happiness to sorrow.

_City_.

To dream that you are in a strange city, denotes you will have sorrowful
occasion to change your abode or mode of living.

_City Council_.

To dream of a city council, foretells that your interests will
clash with public institutions and there will be discouraging
outlooks for you.

_City Hall_.

To dream of a city hall, denotes contentions and threatened law suits.

To a young woman this dream is a foreboding of unhappy estrangement
from her lover by her failure to keep virtue inviolate.

_Clams_.

To dream of clams, denotes you will have dealings with an obstinate but
honest person.  To eat them, foretells you will enjoy another's prosperity.

For a young woman to dream of eating baked clams with her sweetheart,
foretells that she will enjoy his money as well as his confidence.

_Clay_.

To dream of clay, denotes isolation of interest and probable insolvency.
To dig in a clay bank, foretells you will submit to extraordinary
demands of enemies.  If you dig in an ash bank and find clay,
unfortunate surprises will combat progressive enterprises or new work.
Your efforts are likely to be misdirected after this dream.

Women will find this dream unfavorable in love, social and business states,
and misrepresentations will overwhelm them.

_Claret_.

To dream of drinking claret, denotes you will come under the influence
of ennobling association.  To dream of seeing broken bottles of claret,
portends you will be induced to commit immoralities by the false persuasions
of deceitful persons.

_Claret Cup and Punch_.

To dream of claret cup or punch, foretells that you will be much
pleased with the attention shown you by new acquaintances.

_Clarionet_.

To dream of a claironet, foretells that you will indulge
in frivolity beneath your usual dignity.  {I}f it is broken,
you will incur the displeasure of a close friend.

_Clairvoyance_.

To dream of being a clairvoyant and seeing yourself in the future,
denotes signal changes in your present occupation, followed by a series
of unhappy conflicts with designing people.

To dream of visiting a clairvoyant, foretells unprosperous commercial
states and unhappy unions.

_Clergyman_.[37]

To dream that you send for a clergyman to preach a funeral sermon,
denotes that you will vainly strive against sickness and to ward off
evil influences, but they will prevail in spite of your earnest endeavors.

If a young woman marries a clergyman in her dream, she will be the object
of much mental distress, and the wayward hand of fortune will lead her into
the morass of adversity.


[37] See Minister.

_Climbing_.[38]

To dream of climbing up a hill or mountain and reaching the top,
you will overcome the most formidable obstacles between you
and a prosperous future; but if you should fail to reach the top,
your dearest plans will suffer being wrecked.

To climb a ladder to the last rung, you will succeed in business;
but if the ladder breaks, you will be plunged into unexpected straits,
and accidents may happen to you.

To see yourself climbing the side of a house in some mysterious
way in a dream, and to have a window suddenly open to let you in,
foretells that you will make or have made extraordinary ventures
against the approbation of friends, but success will eventually
crown your efforts, though there will be times when despair
will almost enshroud you.


[38] See Ascend Hill and Mountain.

_Clock_.

To dream that you see a clock, denotes danger from a foe.
To hear one strike, you will receive unpleasant news.
The death of some friend is implied.

_Cloister_.

To dream of a cloister, omens dissatisfaction with present
surroundings, and you will soon seek new environments.
For a young woman to dream of a cloister, foretells that her
life will be made unselfish by the chastening of sorrow.

_Clothes_.[39]

To dream of seeing clothes soiled and torn, denotes that deceit will be
practised to your harm.  Beware of friendly dealings with strangers.

For a woman to dream that her clothing is soiled or torn, her virtue
will be dragged in the mire if she is not careful of her associates.
Clean new clothes, denotes prosperity.

To dream that you have plenty, or an assortment of clothes,
is a doubtful omen; you may want the necessaries of life.
To a young person, this dream denotes unsatisfied
hopes and disappointments.


[39] See Apparel.

_Clouds_.

To dream of seeing dark heavy clouds, portends misfortune and bad management.
If rain is falling, it denotes troubles and sickness.

To see bright transparent clouds with the sun shining through them,
you will be successful after trouble has been your companion.

To see them with the stars shining, denotes fleeting joys
and small advancements.

_Clover_.

Walking through fields of fragrant clover is a propitious dream.
It brings all objects desired into the reach of the dreamer.
Fine crops is portended for the farmer and wealth for the young.
Blasted fields of clover brings harrowing and regretful sighs.

To dream of clover, foretells prosperity will soon enfold you.
For a young woman to dream of seeing a snake crawling through
blossoming clover, foretells she will be early disappointed
in love, and her surroundings will be gloomy and discouraging,
though to her friends she seems peculiarly fortunate.

_Cloven Foot_.

To dream of a cloven foot, portends some unusual ill luck is threatening you,
and you will do well to avoid the friendship of strange persons.

_Club_.

To dream of being approached by a person bearing a club, denotes that
you will be assailed by your adversaries, but you will overcome them
and be unusually happy and prosperous; but if you club any one,
you will undergo a rough and profitless journey.

_Coach_.

To dream of riding in a coach, denotes continued losses and depressions
in business.  Driving one implies removal or business changes.

_Coals_.

To see bright coals of fire, denotes pleasure and many pleasant changes.
To dream you handle them yourself, denotes unmitigated joy.
To see dead coals implies trouble and disappointments.

_Coal-hod_.

To dream of a coal-hod, denotes that grief will be likely to fill a vacancy
made by reckless extravagance.  To see your neighbor carrying in hods,
foretells your surroundings will be decidedly distasteful and inharmonious.

_Coat_.[40]

To dream of wearing another's coat, signifies that you will ask
some friend to go security for you.  To see your coat torn,
denotes the loss of a close friend and dreary business.

To see a new coat, portends for you some literary honor.

To lose your coat, you will have to rebuild your fortune lost
through being over-confident in speculations.


[40] See Apparel and Clothes.

_Coat-of-Arms_.

To dream of seeing your coat-of-arms, is a dream of ill luck.
You will never possess a title.

_Cocoa_.

To dream of cocoa, denotes you will cultivate distasteful friends
for your own advancement and pleasure.

_Cocoanut_.

Cocoanuts in dreams, warns you of fatalities in your expectations,
as sly enemies are encroaching upon your rights in the guise of
ardent friends.  Dead cocoanut trees are a sign of loss and sorrow.
The death of some one near you may follow.

_Cock-Crowing_.

To dream of hearing a cock crowing in the morning, is significant of good.
If you be single, it denotes an early marriage and a luxurious home.

To hear one at night is despair, and cause for tears you will have.

To dream of seeing cocks fight, you will leave your family
because of quarrels and infidelity.  This dream usually
announces some unexpected and sorrowful events.  The cock
warned the Apostle Peter when he was about to perjure himself.
It may also warn you in a dream when the meshes of the world
are swaying you from ``the straight line'' of spiritual wisdom.

_Cockade_.

This dream denotes that foes will bring disastrous suits against you.
Beware of titles.

_Cocktail_.

To drink a cocktail while dreaming, denotes that you will deceive your
friends as to your inclinations and enjoy the companionship of fast
men and women while posing as a serious student and staid home lover.
For a woman, this dream portends fast living and an ignoring of moral
and set rules.

_Coca-Cola_.

For a woman to dream that she is drinking coca-cola signifies
that she will lose health and a chance for marrying a wealthy
man by her abandonment to material delights.

_Coffin_.

This dream is unlucky.  You will, if you are a farmer, see your
crops blasted and your cattle lean and unhealthy.  To business men
it means debts whose accumulation they are powerless to avoid.
To the young it denotes unhappy unions and death of loved ones.

To see your own coffin in a dream, business defeat and domestic
sorrow may be expected.

To dream of a coffin moving of itself, denotes sickness and
marriage in close conjunction.  Sorrow and pleasure intermingled.
Death may follow this dream, but there will also be good.

To see your corpse in a coffin, signifies brave efforts will be crushed
in defeat and ignominy,

To dream that you find yourself sitting on a coffin in a moving hearse,
denotes desperate if not fatal illness for you or some person closely
allied to you.

Quarrels with the opposite sex is also indicated.
You will remorsefully consider your conduct toward a friend.

_Coffee_.

To dream of drinking coffee, denotes the disapproval of friends toward
your marriage intentions.  If married, disagreements and frequent
quarrels are implied.

To dream of dealing in coffee, portends business failures.
If selling, sure loss.  Buying it, you may with ease
retain your credit.

For a young woman to see or handle coffee she will be made a by-word if she
is not discreet in her actions.

To dream of roasting coffee, for a young woman it denotes escape
from evil by luckily marrying a stranger.

To see ground coffee, foretells successful struggles with adversity.
Parched coffee, warns you of the evil attentions of strangers.

Green coffee, denotes you have bold enemies who will show you no quarter,
but will fight for your overthrow.

_Coffee Mill_.

To see a coffee mill in your dreams, denotes you are approaching
a critical danger, and all your energy and alertness will have
to stand up with obduracy to avert its disastrous consequences.
To hear it grinding, signifies you will hardly overthrow some evil
pitted against your interest.

_Coffee House_.

To see or visit a coffee house in your dreams, foretells that you will
unwisely entertain friendly relations with persons known to be your enemies.
Designing women may intrigue against your morality and possessions.

_Coins_.

To dream of gold, denotes great prosperity and much pleasure
derived from sight-seeing and ocean voyages.

Silver coin is unlucky to dream about.  Dissensions will arise
in the most orderly families.

For a maiden to dream that her lover gives her a silver coin,
signifies she will be jilted by him.

Copper coins, denotes despair and physical burdens.  Nickel coins,
imply that work of the lowest nature will devolve upon you.

If silver coins are your ideal of money, and they are bright and clean,
or seen distinctly in your possession, the dream will be a propitious one.

_Coke_.

To dream of coke, denotes affliction and discord will enter
your near future.

_Coke Oven_.

To see coke ovens burning, foretells some unexpected good fortune
will result from failure in some enterprise.

_Cold_.

To dream of suffering from cold, you are warned to look well to your affairs.
There are enemies at work to destroy you.  Your health is also menaced.

_Colonel_.

To dream of seeing or being commanded by a colonel, denotes you will fail
to reach any prominence in social or business circles.

If you are a colonel, it denotes you will contrive to hold position
above those of friends or acquaintances.

_Collar_.

To dream of wearing a collar, you will have high honors thrust upon you
that you will hardly be worthy of.  For a woman to dream of collars,
she will have many admirers, but no sincere ones, She will be likely
to remain single for a long while.

_College_.

To dream of a college, denotes you are soon to advance to a position
long sought after.  To dream that you are back in college, foretells you
will receive distinction through some well favored work.

_Colliery or Coal-Mine_.

To dream of being in a coal-mine or colliery and seeing miners,
denotes that some evil will assert its power for your downfall;
but if you dream of holding a share in a coal-mine, it denotes
your safe investment in some deal.

For a young woman to dream of mining coal, foreshows she will become
the wife of a real-estate dealer or dentist.

_Collision_.


Back to Full Books