10,000 Dreams Interpreted [Or. . ."What's In A Dream"] [Or. . .Dreams, Their Scientific and Practical Interpretations]

To dream of an increase in your business, signifies that you
will overcome existing troubles.

_Independent_.

To dream that you are very independent, denotes that you have a rival
who may do you an injustice.

To dream that you gain an independence of wealth, you may not
be so succcessful{sic} at that time as you expect, but good
results are promised.

_India Rubber_.

To dream of India rubber, denotes unfavorable changes in your affairs.
If you stretch it, you will try to establish a greater business than
you can support.

_Indifference_.

To dream of indifference, signifies pleasant companions for a very short time.

For a young woman to dream that her sweetheart is indifferent to her,
signifies that he may not prove his affections in the most appropriate way.
To dream that she is indifferent to him, means that she will prove
untrue to him.

_Indigo_.

To see indigo in a dream, denotes you will deceive friendly
persons in order to cheat them out of their be longings.
To see indigo water, foretells you will be involved in an
ugly love affair.

_Indigestion_.

To dream of indigestion, indicates unhealthy and gloomy surroundings.

_Indistinct_.

If in your dreams you see objects indistinctly, it portends unfaithfulness
in friendships, and uncertain dealings.

_Indulgence_.

For a woman to dream of indulgence, denotes that she will not escape
unfavorable comment on her conduct.

_Industry_.

To dream that you are industrious, denotes that you will be unusually
active in planning and working out ideas to further your interests,
and that you will be successful in your undertakings.

For a lover to dream of being industriously at work, shows he will succeed
in business, and that his companion will advance his position.

To see others busy, is favorable to the dreamer.

_Infants_.

To dream of seeing a newly born infant, denotes pleasant surprises
are nearing you.  For a young woman to dream she has an infant,
foretells she will be accused of indulgence in immoral pastime.
To see an infant swimming, portends a fortunate escape
from some entanglement.

_Infirmary_.[100]

To dream that you leave an infirmary, denotes your escape from wily
enemies who will cause you much worry.


[100] See Hospital.

_Infirmities_.

To dream of infirmities, denotes misfortune in love and business;
enemies are not to be misunderstood, and sickness may follow.

To dream that you see others infirm, denotes that you may have various
troubles and disappointments in business.

_Influence_.

If you dream of seeking rank or advancement through the influence
of others, your desires will fail to materialize; but if you
are in an influential position, your prospects will assume
a bright form.

To see friends in high positions, your companions will be congenial,
and you will be free from vexations.

_Inheritance_.[101]

To dream that you receive an inheritance, foretells that you
will be successful in easily obtaining your desires.


[101] See Estate.

_Injury_.[102]

To dream of an injury being done you, signifies that an unfortunate
occurrence will soon grieve and vex you.


[102] See Hurt.

_Ink_.

To see ink spilled over one's clothing, many small and spiteful
meannesses will be wrought you through envy.

If a young woman sees ink, she will be slandered by a rival.

To dream that you have ink on your fingers, you will be jealous
and seek to injure some one unless you exercise your better nature.
If it is red ink, you will be involved in a serious trouble.

To dream that you make ink, you will engage in a low and debasing business,
and you will fall into disreputable associations.

To see bottles of ink in your dreams, indicates enemies
and unsuccessful interests.

_Ink-stand_.

Empty ink-stands denote that you will narrowly escape public denunciation
for some supposed injustice.

To see them filled with ink, if you are not cautious, enemies will
succeed in calumniation.

_Inn_.

To dream of an inn, denotes prosperity and pleasures, if the inn
is commodious and well furnished.

To be at a dilapidated and ill kept inn, denotes poor success,
or mournful tasks, or unhappy journeys.

_Inquest_.

To dream of an inquest, foretells you will be unfortunate
in your friendships.

_Inquisition_.

To dream of an inquisition, bespeaks for you an endless round
of trouble and great disappointment.

If you are brought before an inquisition on a charge of wilfulness,
you will be unable to defend yourself from malicious slander.

_Insane_.

To dream of being insane, forebodes disastrous results to some newly
undertaken work, or ill health may work sad changes in your prospects.

To see others insane, denotes disagreeable contact with suffering
and appeals from the poverty-stricken. The utmost care should be taken
of the health after this dream.

_Inscription_.

To dream you see an inscription, foretells you will shortly
receive unpleasant communications.  If you are reading them
on tombs, you will be distressed by sickness of a grave nature.
To write one, you will lose a valued friend.

_Insolvent_.

If you dream that you are insolvent, you will not have to resort
to this means to square yourself with the world, as your energy
and pride will enable you to transact business in a fair way.
But other worries may sorely afflict you.

To dream that others are insolvent, you will meet with honest
men in your dealings, but by their frankness they may harm you.
For a young woman, it means her sweetheart will be honest and thrifty,
but vexatious discords may arise in her affairs.

_Intemperance_.

To dream of being intemperate in the use of your intellectual forces,
you will seek after foolish knowledge fail to benefit yourself,
and give pain and displeasure to your friends.

If you are intemperate in love, or other passions, you will reap disease
or loss of fortune and esteem.  For a young woman to thus dream,
she will lose a lover and incur the displeasure of close friends.

_Intercede_.

To intercede for some one in your dreams, shows you will secure
aid when you desire it most.

_Intermarry_.

To dream of intermarrying, denotes quarrels and contentions
which will precipitate you into trouble and loss.

_Interpreter_.

To dream of an interpreter, denotes you will undertake affairs
which will fail in profit.

_Intestine_.

To dream of seeing intestines, signifies you are about to be
visited by a grave calamity, which will remove some friend.
To see your own intestines, denotes grave situations are
closing around you; sickness of a nature to affect you
in your daily communications with others threatens you.
Probable loss, with much displeasure, is also denoted.
If you think you lay them upon something, which turns
out to be a radiator, and they begin to grow hot and make
you very uncomfortable, and you ask others to assist you,
and they refuse, it foretells unexpected calamity, which will
probably come in the form of a desperate illness or a misfortune
for which you will be censured by those formerly your friends.
You may have trouble in extricating yourself from
an unpromising predicament.

_Intoxication_.[103]

To dream of intoxication, denotes that you are cultivating your desires
for illicit pleasures.


[103] See Drunk.

_Inundation_.[104]

To dream of seeing cities or country submerged in dark, seething waters,
denotes great misfortune and loss of life through some dreadful calamity.

To see human beings swept away in an inundation, portends bereavements
and despair, making life gloomy and unprofitable.

To see a large area inundated with clear water, denotes profit and ease
after seemingly hopeless struggles with fortune.


[104] See Food.

_Invalid_.

To dream of invalids, is a sign of displeasing companions interfering
with your interest.  To think you are one, portends you are threatened
with displeasing circumstances.

_Invective_.

To dream of using invectives, warns you of passionate outbursts of anger,
which may estrange you from close companions.

To hear others using them, enemies are closing you in to apparent
wrong and deceits.

_Inventor_.

To dream of an inventor, foretells you will soon achieve
some unique work which will add honor to your name.
To dream that you are inventing something, or feel interested
in some invention, denotes you will aspire to fortune and will
be successful in your designs.

_Invite_.

To dream that you invite persons to visit you, denotes that some
unpleasant event is near, and will cause worry and excitement
in your otherwise pleasant surroundings.

If you are invited to make a visit, you will receive sad news.

For a woman to dream that she is invited to attend a party,
she will have pleasant anticipations, but ill luck will mar them.

_Iron_.

To dream of iron, is a harsh omen of distress.

To feel an iron weight bearing you down, signifies mental perplexities
and material losses.

To strike with iron, denotes selfishness and cruelty to those
dependent upon you.

To dream that you manufacture iron, denotes that you will use
unjust means to accumulate wealth.

To sell iron, you will have doubtful success, and your friends
will not be of noble character.

To see old, rusty iron, signifies poverty and disappointment.

To dream that the price of iron goes down, you will realize that fortune
is a very unsafe factor in your life.

If iron advances, you will see a gleam of hope in a dark prospectus.

To see red-hot iron in your dreams, denotes failure for you
by misapplied energy.

_Ironing_.

To dream of ironing, denotes domestic comforts and orderly business.

If a woman dreams that she burns her hands while ironing,
it foretells she will have illness or jealousy to disturb her peace.
If she scorches the clothes, she will have a rival who will cause
her much displeasure and suspicions.  If the irons seem too cold,
she will lack affection in her home.

_Island_.

To dream that you are on an island in a clear stream,
signifies pleasant journeys and fortunate enterprises.
To a woman, this omens a happy marriage.

A barren island, indicates forfeiture of happiness and
money through intemperance.

To see an island, denotes comfort and easy circumstances after much
striving and worrying to meet honorable obligations.

To see people on an island, denotes a struggle to raise yourself higher
in prominent circles.

_Itch_.

To see persons with the itch, and you endeavor to escape contact,
you will stand in fear of distressing results when your endeavors
will bring pleasant success.

If you dream you have the itch yourself, you will be harshly used,
and will defend yourself by incriminating others.  For a young woman
to have this dream, omens she will fall into dissolute companionship.

To dream that you itch, denotes unpleasant avocations.

_Ivory_.

To dream of ivory, is favorable to the fortune of the dreamer.

To see huge pieces of ivory being carried, denotes financial
success and pleasures unalloyed.

_Ivy_.

To dream of seeing ivy growing on trees or houses, predicts excellent
health and increase of fortune.  Innumerable joys will succeed this dream.
To a young woman, it augurs many prized distinctions.  If she sees ivy
clinging to the wall in the moonlight, she will have clandestine meetings
with young men.

Withered ivy, denotes broken engagements and sadness.



J.

``_Then thou scarest me with dreams, and terrifiest me through visions_.''--
Job vii, 14

_Jackdaw_.

To see a jackdaw, denotes ill health and quarrels.
To catch one, you will outwit enemies.

To kill one, you will come into possession of disputed property.

_Jail_.[105]

To see others in jail, you will be urged to grant privileges to persons
whom you believe to be unworthy

To see negroes in jail, denotes worries and loss through
negligence of underlings.

For a young woman to dream that her lover is in jail, she will be disappointed
in his character, as he will prove a deceiver.


[105] See Gaol.  _Jailer_.

To see a jailer, denotes that treachery will embarrass your interests
and evil women will enthrall you.

To see a mob attempting to break open a jail, is a forerunner of evil,
and desperate measures will be used to extort money and bounties from you.

_Jam_.

To dream of eating jam, if pure, denotes pleasant surprises and journeys.

To dream of making jam, foretells to a woman a happy home
and appreciative friends.

_Janitor_.

To dream of a janitor, denotes bad management and disobedient children.
Unworthy servants will annoy you.

To look for a janitor and fail to find him, petty annoyances
will disturb your otherwise placid existence.  If you find him,
you will have pleasant associations with strangers, and your
affairs will have no hindrances.

_January_.

To dream of this month, denotes you will be afflicted with unloved
companions or children.

_Jar_.

To dream of empty jars, denotes impoverishment and distress.

To see them full, you will be successful.

If you buy jars, your success will be precarious and your burden
will be heavy.

To see broken jars, distressing sickness or deep disappointment awaits you.

_Jasper_.

To dream of seeing jasper, is a happy omen, bringing success and love.
For a young woman to lose a jasper, is a sign of disagreement with her lover.

_Jaundice_.

To dream that you have the jaundice, denotes prosperity
after temporary embarrassments.

To see others with jaundice, you will be worried with unpleasant companions
and discouraging prospects.

_Javelin_.

To dream of defending yourself with a javelin, your most private
affairs will be searched into to establish claims of dishonesty,
and you will prove your innocence after much wrangling.

If you are pierced by a javelin, enemies will succeed in giving you trouble.

To see others carrying javelins, your interests are threatened.

_Jaws_.

To dream of seeing heavy, misshapen jaws, denotes disagreements,
and ill feeling will be shown between friends.

If you dream that you are in the jaws of a wild beast,
enemies will work injury to your affairs and happiness.
This is a vexatious and perplexing dream.

If your own jaws ache with pain, you will be exposed to climatic changes,
and malaria may cause you loss in health and finances.

_Jay-bird_.

To dream of a jay-bird, foretells pleasant visits from friends
and interesting gossips.

To catch a jay-bird, denotes pleasant, though unfruitful, tasks.

To see a dead jay-bird, denotes domestic unhappiness and many vicissitudes.

_Jealousy_.

To dream that you are jealous of your wife, denotes the influence
of enemies and narrow-minded persons.  If jealous of your sweetheart,
you will seek to displace a rival.

If a woman dreams that she is jealous of her husband, she will find
many shocking incidents to vex and make her happiness a travesty.

If a young woman is jealous of her lover, she will find that he is more
favorably impressed with the charms of some other woman than herself.

If men and women are jealous over common affairs, they will meet
many unpleasant worries in the discharge of every-day business.

_Jelly_.

To dream of eating jelly, many pleasant interruptions will take place.

For a woman to dream of making jelly, signifies she will enjoy pleasant
reunions with friends.

_Jessamine_.

To dream of jessamine, denotes you are approximating some exquisite pleasure,
but which will be fleeting.

_Jester_.

To dream of a jester, foretells you will ignore important things in looking
after silly affairs.

_Jew_.

To dream of being in company with a Jew, signifies untiring ambition
and an irrepressible longing after wealth and high position,
which will be realized to a very small extent.

To have transactions with a Jew, you will prosper legally
in important affairs.

For a young woman to dream of a Jew, omens that she will mistake flattery
for truth, and find that she is only a companion for pleasure.

For a man to dream of a Jewess, denotes that his desires
run parallel with voluptuousness and easy comfort.
He should constitute himself woman's defender.

For a Gentile to dream of Jews, signifies worldly cares and profit
from dealing with them.

To argue with them, your reputation is endangered from a business standpoint.

_Jewelry_.

To dream of broken jewelry, denotes keen disappointment in attaining
one's highest desires.

If the jewelry be cankered, trusted friends will fail you,
and business cares will be on you.

_Jewels_.

To dream of jewels, denotes much pleasure and riches.

To wear them, brings rank and satisfied ambitions.

To see others wearing them, distinguished places will be held by you,
or by some friend.

To dream of jeweled garments, betokens rare good fortune to the dreamer.
Inheritance or speculation will raise him to high positions.

If you inherit jewelry, your prosperity will be unusual,
but not entirely satisfactory.

To dream of giving jewelry away, warns you that some vital estate
is threatening you.

For a young woman to dream that she receives jewelry, indicates much
pleasure and a desirable marriage.  To dream that she loses jewels,
she will meet people who will flatter and deceive her.

To find jewels, denotes rapid and brilliant advancement in affairs
of interest.  To give jewels away, you will unconsciously work
detriment to yourself.

To buy them, proves that you will be very successful in momentous affairs,
especially those pertaining to the heart.

_Jew's-harp_.

To dream of a Jew's-harp, foretells you will experience a slight
improvement in your affairs.  To play one, is a sign that you
will fall in love with a stranger.

_Jig_.

To dance a jig, denotes cheerful occupations and light pleasures.

To see negroes dancing a jig, foolish worries will offset pleasure.

To see your sweetheart dancing a jig, your companion will be possessed
with a merry and hopeful disposition.

To see ballet girls dancing a jig, you will engage in undignified
amusements and follow low desires.

_Jockey_.

To dream of a jockey, omens you will appreciate a gift
from an unexpected source.  For a young woman to dream
that she associates with a jockey, or has one for a lover,
indicates she will win a husband out of her station.
To see one thrown from a horse, signifies you will be called
on for aid by strangers.

_Jolly_.

To dream that you feel jolly and are enjoying the merriment
of companions, you will realize pleasure from the good
behavior of children and have satisfying results in business.
If there comes the least rift in the merriment, worry will
intermingle with the success of the future.

_Journey_.

To dream that you go on a journey, signifies profit or a disappointment,
as the travels are pleasing and successful or as accidents and disagreeable
events take active part in your journeying.

To see your friends start cheerfully on a journey, signifies delightful
change and more harmonious companions than you have heretofore known.
If you see them depart looking sad, it may be many moons before you see
them again.  Power and loss are implied.

To make a long-distance journey in a much shorter time than you expected,
denotes you will accomplish some work in a surprisingly short time,
which will be satisfactory in the way of reimbursement.

_Journeyman_.

To dream of a journeyman, denotes you are soon to lose money
by useless travels.  For a woman, this dream brings pleasant trips,
though unexpected ones.

_Joy_.

To dream that you feel joy over any event, denotes harmony among friends.

_Jubilee_.

To dream of a jubilee, denotes many pleasureable enterprises in which you
will be a participant.  For a young woman, this is a favorable dream,
pointing to matrimony and increase of temporal blessings.

To dream of a religious jubilee, denotes close but comfortable environments.

_Judge_.

To dream of coming before a judge, signifies that disputes will be
settled by legal proceedings.  Business or divorce cases may assume
gigantic proportions.  To have the case decided in your favor,
denotes a successful termination to the suit; if decided against you,
then you are the aggressor and you should seek to right injustice.

_Judgment Day_.

To dream of the judgment day, foretells that you will accomplish some
well-planned work, if you appear resigned and hopeful of escaping punishment.
Otherwise, your work will prove a failure.

For a young woman to appear before the judgment bar and hear the verdict
of ``Guilty,'' denotes that she will cause much distress among her friends
by her selfish and unbecoming conduct.  If she sees the dead rising,
and all the earth solemnly and fearfully awaiting the end, there will
be much struggling for her, and her friends will refuse her aid.
It is also a forerunner of unpleasant gossip, and scandal is threatened.
Business may assume hopeless aspects.

_Jug_.

If you dream of jugs well filled with transparent liquids,
your welfare is being considered by more than yourself.
Many true friends will unite to please and profit you.
If the jugs are empty, your conduct will estrange you from
friends and station.

Broken jugs, indicate sickness and failures in employment.

If you drink wine from a jug, you will enjoy robust health and find
pleasure in all circles.  Optimistic views will possess you.

To take an unpleasant drink from a jug, disappointment and disgust
will follow pleasant anticipations.

_July_.

To dream of this month, denotes you will be depressed with
gloomy outlooks, but, as suddenly, your spirits will rebound
to unimagined pleasure and good fortune.

_Jumping_.

If you dream of jumping over any object, you will succeed in every endeavor;
but if you jump and fall back, disagreeable affairs will render
life almost intolerable.

To jump down from a wall, denotes reckless speculations and
disappointment in love.

_Jumping-jack_.

To dream of a jumping-jack, denotes that idleness and trivial
pastimes will occupy your thoughts to the exclusion of serious
and sustaining plans.

_June_.

To dream of June, foretells unusual gains in all undertakings.

For a woman to think that vegetation is decaying, or that a drouth
is devastating the land, she will have sorrow and loss which will
be lasting in its effects.

_Juniper_.

To dream of seeing a juniper tree, portends happiness and wealth
out of sorrow and depressed conditions.  For a young woman,
this dreams omens a bright future after disappointing love affairs.
To the sick, this is an augury of speedy recovery.

To eat, or gather, the berries of a juniper tree, foretells
trouble and sickness.

_Jury_.

To dream that you are on the jury, denotes dissatisfaction
with your employments, and you will seek to materially
change your position.

If you are cleared from a charge by the jury, your business will be
successful and affairs will move your way, but if you should be condemned,
enemies will overpower you and harass you beyond endurance.

_Justice_.

To dream that you demand justice from a person, denotes that you
are threatened with embarrassments through the false statements
of people who are eager for your downfall.

If some one demands the same of you, you will find that your conduct
and reputation are being assailed, and it will be extremely doubtful
if you refute the charges satisfactorily.



K.

``_In thoughts from the vision of the night, when deep sleep
falleth on men, fear came upon me, and trembling, which made
all my bones to shake_.''-Job iv, 13-14.

_Kaleidoscope_.

Kaleidoscopes working before you in a dream, portend swift changes
with little of favorable promise in them.

_Kangaroo_.

To see a kangaroo in your dreams, you will outwit a wily enemy who seeks
to place you in an unfavorable position before the public and the person
you are striving to win.

If a kangaroo attacks you, your reputation will be in jeopardy.

If you kill one, you will succeed in spite of enemies and obstacles.

To see a kangaroo's hide, denotes that you are in a fair way
to success.  _Katydids_.

To dream of hearing katydids, is a prognostic of misfortune and unusual
dependence on others.  If any sick person ask you what they are,
foretells there will be surprising events in your present and future.

For a woman to see them, signifies she will have a quarrelsome
husband or lover.

_Keg_.

To dream of a keg, denotes you will have a struggle to throw off oppression.
Broken ones, indicate separation from family or friends.

_Kettle_.

To see kettles in your dream, denotes great and laborious work before you.

To see a kettle of boiling water, your struggles will soon end and a change
will come to you.

To see a broken kettle, denotes failure after a mighty effort
to work out a path to success.

For a young woman to dream of handling dark kettles, foretells disappointment
in love and marriage; but a light-colored kettle brings to her absolute
freedom from care, and her husband will be handsome and worthy.

_Key_.

To dream of keys, denotes unexpected changes.

If the keys are lost, unpleasant adventures will affect you.

To find keys, brings domestic peace and brisk turns to business.

Broken keys, portends separation either through death or jealousy.

For a young woman to dream of losing the key to any personal ornament,
denotes she will have quarrels with her lover, and will suffer much
disquiet therefrom.  If she dreams of unlocking a door with a key,
she will have a new lover and have over-confidence in him.  If she locks
a door with a key, she will be successful in selecting a husband.
If she gives the key away, she will fail to use judgment in conversation
and darken her own reputation.

_Keyhole_.

To dream that you spy upon others through a keyhole,
you will damage some person by disclosing confidence.
If you catch others peeping through a keyhole, you will have
false friends delving into your private matters to advance
themselves over you.

To dream that you cannot find the keyhole, you will unconsciously
injure a friend.

_Kid_.

To dream of a kid, denotes you will not be over-scrupulous in your morals
or pleasures.  You will be likely to bring grief to some loving heart.

_Kidneys_.

To dream about your kidneys, foretells you are threatened
with a serious illness, or there will be trouble in marriage
relations for you.

If they act too freely, you will be a party to some racy intrigue.
If they refuse to perform their work, there will be a sensation,
and to your detriment.  If you eat kidney-stew, some officious person
will cause you disgust in some secret lover affair.

_Killing_.

To dream of killing a defenseless man, prognosticates sorrow
and failure in affairs.

If you kill one in defense, or kill a ferocious beast, it denotes
victory and a rise in position.

_King_.

To dream of a king, you are struggling with your might,
and ambition is your master.

To dream that you are crowned king, you will rise above your
comrades and co-workers.

If you are censured by a king, you will be reproved for a neglected duty.

For a young woman to be in the presence of a king, she will
marry a man whom she will fear.  To receive favors from a king,
she will rise to exalted positions and be congenially wedded.

_Kiss_.

To dream that you see children kissing, denotes happy reunions
in families and satisfactory work.

To dream that you kiss your mother, you will be very successful
in your enterprises, and be honored and beloved by your friends.

To kiss a brother or sister, denotes much pleasure and good
in your association.

To kiss your sweetheart in the dark, denotes dangers and immoral engagements.

To kiss her in the light, signifies honorable intentions occupy
your mind always in connection with women.

To kiss a strange woman, denotes loose morals and perverted integrity.

To dream of kissing illicitly, denotes dangerous past-times. The indulgence
of a low passion may bring a tragedy into well-thought-of homes.

To see your rival kiss your sweetheart, you are in danger
of losing her esteem.

For married people to kiss each other, denotes that harmony is prized
in the home life.

To dream of kissing a person on the neck, denotes passionate inclinations
and weak mastery of self.

If you dream of kissing an enemy, you will make advance towards
reconciliation with an angry friend.

For a young woman to dream that some person sees her kiss her lover,
indicates that spiteful envy is entertained for her by a false friend.
For her to see her lover kiss another, she will be disappointed in her
hopes of marriage.

_Kitchen_.

To dream of a kitchen, denotes you will be forced to meet emergencies which
will depress your spirits.  For a woman to dream that her kitchen is clear.
and orderly, foretells she will become the mistress of interesting fortunes.

_Kite_.

To dream of flying a kite, denotes a great show of wealth, or business,
but with little true soundness to it all.

To see the kite thrown upon the ground, foretells disappointment and failure.

To dream of making a kite, you will speculate largely on small
means and seek to win the one you love by misrepresentations.

To see children flying kites, denotes pleasant and light occupation.
If the kite ascends beyond the vision high hopes and aspirations
will resolve themselves into disappointments and loss.

_Kitten_.[106]

For a woman to dream of a beautiful fat, white kitten,
omens artful deception will be practised upon her, which will
almost ensnare her to destruction, but her good sense and
judgment will prevail in warding off unfortunate complications.
If the kittens are soiled, or colored and lean, she will be
victimized into glaring indiscretions.

To dream of kittens, denotes abominable small troubles and vexations
will pursue and work you loss, unless you kill the kitten, and then
you will overcome these worries.

To see snakes kill kittens, you have enemies who in seeking to injure
you will work harm to themselves.


[106] See Cats.

_Knapsack_.

To see a knapsack while dreaming, denotes you will find your
greatest pleasure away from the associations of friends.
For a woman to see an old dilapidated one, means poverty
and disagreeableness for her.

_Knee_.

To dream that your knees are too large, denotes sudden ill luck for you.
If they are stiff and pain you, swift and fearful calamity awaits you.

For a woman to dream that she has well-formed and smooth knees,
predicts she will have many admirers, but none to woo her in wedlock.

If they are soiled, sickness from dissipation is portended.
If they are unshapely, unhappy changes in her fortune will
displace ardent hopes.

To dream of knees is an unfortunate omen.

_Knife_.

To dream of a knife is bad for the dreamer, as it portends separation
and quarrels, and losses in affairs of a business character.

To see rusty knives, means dissatisfaction, and complaints
of those in the home, and separation of lovers.

Sharp knives and highly polished, denotes worry.
Foes are ever surrounding you.

Broken knives, denotes defeat whatever the pursuit, whether in
love or business.

To dream that you are wounded with a knife, foretells domestic troubles,
in which disobedient children will figure largely.  To the unmarried,
it denotes that disgrace may follow.

To dream that you stab another with a knife, denotes baseness of character,
and you should strive to cultivate a higher sense of right.

_Knife Grinder_.

To dream of a knife grinder, foretells unwarrantable liberties
will be taken with your possessions.  For a woman, this omens
unhappy unions and much drudgery.

_Knitting_.

For a woman to dream of knitting, denotes that she will possess
a quiet and peaceful home, where a loving companion and dutiful
children delight to give pleasure.

For a man to be in a kniting-mill, indicates thrift and a solid
rise in prospects.

For a young woman to dream of knitting, is an omen of a hasty
but propitious marriage.

For a young woman to dream that she works in a knitting-mill,
denotes that she will have a worthy and loyal lover.
To see the mill in which she works dilapidated, she will meet
with reverses in fortune and love.

_Knocker_.

To dream of using a knocker, foretells you will be forced to ask
aid and counsel of others.

_Knocking_.

To hear knocking in your dreams, denotes that tidings of a grave nature
will soon be received by you.  If you are awakened by the knocking,
the news will affect you the more seriously.

_Knots_.

To dream of seeing knots, denotes much worry over the most trifling affairs.
If your sweetheart notices another, you will immediately find cause
to censure him.

To tie a knot, signifies an independent nature, and you will refuse
to be nagged by ill-disposed lover or friend.

_Krishna_.

To see Krishna in your dreams, denotes that your greatest joy
will be in pursuit of occult knowledge, and you will school
yourself to the taunts of friends, and cultivate a philosophical
bearing toward life and sorrow.



L.


``_And he dreamed yet another dream, and told it to his brethren,
and said, `Behold, I have dreamed a dream more; and, behold, the sun
and the moon and the eleven stars made obeisance to me_.'
''--Gen. xxxvii, 9.

_Label_.

To dream of a label, foretells you will let an enemy see the inside
of your private affairs, and will suffer from the negligence.

_Labor_.

To dream that you watch domestic animals laboring under heavy burdens,
denotes that you will be prosperous, but unjust to your servants,
or those employed by you.

To see men toiling, signifies profitable work, and robust health.
To labor yourself, denotes favorable outlook for any new enterprise,
and bountiful crops if the dreamer is interested in farming.

_Laboratory_.

To dream of being in a laboratory, denotes great energies wasted in unfruitful
enterprises when you might succeed in some more practical business.

If you think yourself an alchemist, and try to discover a process
to turn other things into gold, you will entertain far-reaching and
interesting projects, but you will fail to reach the apex of your ambition.
Wealth will prove a myth, and the woman you love will hold a false
position towards you.

_Labyrinth_.

If you dream of a labyrinth, you will find yourself entangled
in intricate and perplexing business conditions, and your wife
will make the home environment intolerable; children and sweethearts
will prove ill-tempered and unattractive.

If you are in a labyrinth of night or darkness, it foretells passing,
but agonizing sickness and trouble.

A labyrinth of green vines and timbers, denotes unexpected happiness
from what was seemingly a cause for loss and despair.

In a network, or labyrinth of railroads, assures you of long
and tedious journeys.  Interesting people will be met,
but no financial success will aid you on these journeys.

_Lace_.

See to it, if you are a lover, that your sweetheart wears lace,
as this dream brings fidelity in love and a rise in position.

If a woman dreams of lace, she will be happy in the realization
of her most ambitious desires, and lovers will bow to her edict.
No questioning or imperiousness on their part.

If you buy lace, you will conduct an expensive establishment,
but wealth will be a solid friend.

If you sell laces, your desires will outrun your resources.

For a young girl to dream of making lace, forecasts that she will win
a handsome, wealthy husband.  If she dreams of garnishing her wedding garments
with lace, she will be favored with lovers who will bow to her charms,
but the wedding will be far removed from her.

_Ladder_.[107]

To dream of a ladder being raised for you to ascend to some height,
your energetic and nervy qualifications will raise you into prominence
in business affairs.

To ascend a ladder, means prosperity and unstinted happiness.

To fall from one, denotes despondency and unsuccessful transactions
to the tradesman, and blasted crops to the farmer.

To see a broken ladder, betokens failure in every instance.

To descend a ladder, is disappointment in business, and unrequited desires.

To escape from captivity, or confinement, by means of a ladder,
you will be successful, though many perilous paths may intervene.

To grow dizzy as you ascend a ladder, denotes that you will not wear
new honors serenely.  You are likely to become haughty and domineering
in your newly acquired position.


[107] See Hill, Ascend, or Fall.

_Ladle_.

To see a ladle in your dreams, denotes you will be fortunate in the selection
of a companion.  Children will prove sources of happiness.

If the ladle is broken or uncleanly, you will have a grievous loss.

_Lagoon_.

To dream of a lagoon, denotes that you will be drawn into a whirlpool
of doubt and confusion through misapplication of your intelligence.

_Lake_.

For a young woman to dream that she is alone on a turbulent and muddy lake,
foretells many vicissitudes are approaching her, and she will regret
former extravagances, and disregard of virtuous teaching.

If the water gets into the boat, but by intense struggling she reaches
the boat-house safely, it denotes she will be under wrong persuasion,
but will eventually overcome it, and rise to honor and distinction.

It may predict the illness of some one near her.

If she sees a young couple in the same position as herself,
who succeed in rescuing themselves, she will find that some friend
has committed indiscretions, but will succeed in reinstating
himself in her favor.

To dream of sailing on a clear and smooth lake, with happy
and congenial companions, you will have much happiness,
and wealth will meet your demands.

A muddy lake, surrounded with bleak rocks and bare trees,
denotes unhappy terminations to business and affection.

A muddy lake, surrounded by green trees, portends that the moral in your
nature will fortify itself against passionate desires, and overcoming
the same will direct your energy into a safe and remunerative channel.
If the lake be clear and surrounded by barrenness, a profitable existence
will be marred by immoral and passionate dissipation.

To see yourself reflected in a clear lake, denotes coming joys
and many ardent friends.

To see foliaged trees reflected in the lake, you will enjoy to a satiety
Love's draught of passion and happiness.

To see slimy and uncanny inhabitants of the lake rise up and menace you,
denotes failure and ill health from squandering time, energy and health
on illicit pleasures.  You will drain the utmost drop of happiness,
and drink deeply of Remorse's bitter concoction.

_Lamb_.[108]

To dream of lambs frolicing{sic} in green pastures, betokens chaste
friendships and joys.  Bounteous and profitable crops to the farmers,
and increase of possessions for others.

To see a dead lamb, signifies sadness and desolation.

Blood showing on the white fleece of a lamb, denotes that innocent ones
will suffer from betrayal through the wrong doing of others.

A lost lamb, denotes that wayward people will be under your influence,
and you should be careful of your conduct.

To see lamb skins, denotes comfort and pleasure usurped from others.

To slaughter a lamb for domestic uses, prosperity will be gained
through the sacrifice of pleasure and contentment.

To eat lamb chops, denotes illness, and much anxiety over
the welfare of children.

To see lambs taking nourishment from their mothers, denotes happiness
through pleasant and intelligent home companions, and many lovable
and beautiful children.

To dream that dogs, or wolves devour lambs, innocent people will suffer
at the hands of insinuating and designing villains.

To hear the bleating of lambs, your generosity will be appealed to.

To see them in a winter storm, or rain, denotes disappointment
in expected enjoyment and betterment of fortune.

To own lambs in your dreams, signifies that your environments
will be pleasant and profitable.

If you carry lambs in your arms, you will be encumbered with
happy cares upon which you will lavish a wealth of devotion,
and no expense will be regretted in responding to appeals
from the objects of your affection.

To shear lambs, shows that you will be cold and mercenary.
You will be honest, but inhumane.

For a woman to dream that she is peeling the skin from a lamb,
and while doing so, she discovers that it is her child,
denotes that she will cause others sorrow which will also rebound
to her grief and loss.

          ``Fair prototype of innocence,
               Sleep upon thy emerald bed,
          No coming evil vents
               A shade above thy head.''


[108] See Sheep.

_Lame_.[109]

For a woman to dream of seeing any one lame, foretells that her pleasures
and hopes will be unfruitful and disappointing.


[109] See Cripple.

_Lament_.

To dream that you bitterly lament the loss of friends, or property,
signifies great struggles and much distress, from which will spring
causes for joy and personal gain.

To lament the loss of relatives, denotes sickness or disappointments,
which will bring you into closer harmony with companions, and will result
in brighter prospects for the future.

_Lamp_.

To see lamps filled with oil, denotes the demonstration of business activity,
from which you will receive gratifying results.

Empty lamps, represent depression and despondency.

To see lighted lamps burning with a clear flame, indicates merited rise
in fortune and domestic bliss.  If they give out a dull, misty radiance,
you will have jealousy and envy, coupled with suspicion, to combat,
in which you will be much pleased to find the right person to attack.

To drop a lighted lamp, your plans and hopes will abruptly
turn into failure.

If it explodes, former friends will unite with enemies in
damaging your interests.

Broken lamps, indicate the death of relatives or friends.

To light a lamp, denotes that you will soon make a change in your affairs,
which will lead to profit.

To carry a lamp, portends that you will be independent and
self-sustaining, preferring your own convictions above others.
If the light fails, you will meet with unfortunate conclusions,
and perhaps the death of friends or relatives.

If you are much affrighted, and throw a bewildering light from your window,
enemies will ensnare you with professions of friendship and interest
in your achievements.

To ignite your apparel from a lamp, you will sustain humiliation
from sources from which you expected encouragement and sympathy,
and your business will not be fraught with much good.

_Lamp-post_.

To see a lamp-post in your dreams, some stranger will prove your staunchiest
friend in time of pressing need.

To fall against a lamp-post, you will have deception to overcome,
or enemies will ensnare you.

To see a lamp-post across your path, you will have much adversity
in your life.

_Lance_.

To dream of a lance, denotes formidable enemies and injurious experiments.

To be wounded by a lance, error of judgment will cause you annoyance.

To break a lance, denotes seeming impossibilities will be overcome
and your desires will be fulfilled.

_Land_.[110]

To dream of land, when it appears fertile, omens good; but if sterile
and rocky, failure and dispondency is prognosticated.

To see land from the ocean, denotes that vast avenues of prosperity
and happiness will disclose themselves to you.

_Landau_.

To dream that you ride in a landau, with your friend or sweetheart,
denotes that incidents of a light, but pleasant character will pass
in rapid succession through your life.

If the vehicle is overturned, then pleasure will abruptly turn into woe.


[110] See Fields ant Earth.

_Lantern_.

To dream of seeing a lantern going before you in the darkness,
signifies unexpected affluence.  If the lantern is suddenly lost
to view, then your success will take an unfavorable turn.

To carry a lantern in your dreams, denotes that your benevolence will win you
many friends.  If it goes out, you fail to gain the prominence you wish.
If you stumble and break it, you will seek to aid others, and in so doing
lose your own station, or be disappointed in some undertaking.

To clean a lantern, signifies great possibilities are open to you.

To lose a lantern, means business depression, and disquiet in the home.

If you buy a lantern, it signifies fortunate deals.

For a young woman to dream that she lights her lover's lantern,
foretells for her a worthy man, and a comfortable home.
If she blows it out, by her own imprudence she will lose a chance
of getting married.

_Lap_.

To dream of sitting on some person's lap, denotes pleasant security
from vexing engagements.  If a young woman dreams that she is holding
a person on her lap, she will be exposed to unfavorable criticism.

To see a serpent in her lap, foretells she is threatened with
humiliation at the hands of enemies.  If she sees a cat in her lap,
she will be endangered by a seductive enemy.

_Lap-dog_.

To dream of a lap-dog, foretells you will be succored by friends
in some approaching dilemma If it be thin and ill-looking, there
will be distressing occurrences to detract from your prospects.

_Lap-robe_.

To dream of a lap-robe, indicates suspicious engagements will place
you under the surveillance of enemies or friends.

To lose one, your actions will be condemned by enemies to injure your affairs.

_Lard_.

To dream of lard, signifies a rise in fortune will soon gratify you.
For a woman to find her hand in melted lard, foretells her disappointment
in attempting to rise in social circles.

_Lark_.

To see larks flying, denotes high aims and purposes through the attainment
of which you will throw off selfishness and cultivate kindly graces of mind.

To hear them singing as they fly, you will be very happy in a new change
of abode, and business will flourish.

To see them fall to the earth and singing as they fall, despairing gloom
will overtake you in pleasure's bewildering delights.

A wounded or dead lark, portends sadness or death.

To kill a lark, portends injury to innocence through wantonness.

If they fly around and light on you, Fortune will turn her promising
countenance towards you.

To catch them in traps, you will win honor and love easily.

To see them eating, denotes a plentiful harvest.

_Latch_.

To dream of a latch, denotes you will meet urgent appeals for aid,
to which you will respond unkindly.  To see a broken latch,
foretells disagreements with your dearest friend.
Sickness is also foretold in this dream.

_Latin_.

To dream of studying this language, denotes victory and distinction
in your efforts to sustain your opinion on subjects of grave interest
to the public welfare.

_Laudanum_.

To dream that you take laudanum, signifies weakness of your own;
and that you will have a tendency to be unduly influenced by others.
You should cultivate determination.

To prevent others from taking this drug, indicates that you
will be the means of conveying great joy and good to people.

To see your lover taking laudanum through disappointment,
signifies unhappy affairs and the loss of a friend.

To give it, slight ailments will attack some member of your domestic circle.

_Laughing_.

To dream that you laugh and feel cheerful, means success in your undertakings,
and bright companions socially.

Laughing immoderately at some weird object, denotes disappointment and lack
of harmony in your surroundings.

To hear the happy laughter of children, means joy and health
to the dreamer.

To laugh at the discomfiture of others, denotes that you will wilfully
injure your friends to gratify your own selfish desires.

To hear mocking laughter, denotes illness and disappointing affairs.

_Laundry_.

To dream of laundering clothes, denotes struggles, but a final victory
in winning fortune.  If the clothes are done satisfactorily, then your
endeavors will bring complete happiness.  If they come out the reverse,
your fortune will fail to procure pleasure.

To see pretty girls at this work, you will seek pleasure out of your rank.

If a laundryman calls at your house, you are in danger of sickness,
or of losing something very valuable.

To see laundry wagons, portends rivalry and contention.

_Laurel_.

Dreaming of the laurel, brings success and fame.  You will acquire
new possessions in love.  Enterprises will be laden with gain.

For a young woman to wreath laurel about her lover's head,
denotes that she will have a faithful man, and one of fame
to woo her.

_Law and Lawsuits_.[111]

To dream of engaging in a lawsuit, warns you of enemies who are
poisoning public opinion against you.  If you know that the suit
is dishonest on your part, you will seek to dispossess true owners
for your own advancement.

If a young man is studying law, he will make rapid rise
in any chosen profession.

For a woman to dream that she engages in a law suit, means she
will be calumniated, and find enemies among friends.


[111] See Judge and Jury.

_Lawns_.

To dream of walking upon well-kept lawns, denotes occasions for joy
and great prosperity.

To join a merry party upon a lawn, denotes many secular amusements,
and business engagements will be successfully carried on.

For a young woman to wait upon a green lawn for the coming of a friend
or lover, denotes that her most ardent wishes concerning wealth and
marriage will be gratified.  If the grass be dead and the lawn marshy,
quarrels and separation may be expected.

To see serpents crawling in the grass before you, betrayal and cruel
insinuations will fill you with despair.

_Lawyer_.[112]

For a young woman to dream that she is connected in any way with a lawyer,
foretells that she will unwittingly commit indiscretions, which will subject
her to unfavorable and mortifying criticism.


[112] See Attorney.

_Lazy_.

To dream of feeling lazy, or acting so, denotes you will make a mistake
in the formation of enterprises, and will suffer keen disappointment.

For a young woman to think her lover is lazy, foretells she will have bad luck
in securing admiration.  Her actions will discourage men who mean marriage.

_Lead_.

To dream of lead, foretells poor success in any engagement.

A lead mine, indicates that your friends will look with suspicion
on your money making.  Your sweetheart will surprise you with her
deceit and ill temper.

To dream of lead ore, foretells distress and accidents.
Business will assume a gloomy cast.

To hunt for lead, denotes discontentment, and a constant
changing of employment.

To melt lead, foretells that by impatience you will bring failure
upon yourself and others.

_Leaking_.

To dream of seeing a leak in anything, is usually significant
of loss and vexations.

_Leaping_.[113]

For a young woman to dream of leaping over an obstruction, denotes that she
will gain her desires after much struggling and opposition.


[113] See Jumping.

_Learning_.

To dream of learning, denotes that you will take great interest
in acquiring knowledge, and if you are economical of your time,
you will advance far into the literary world.

To enter halls, or places of learning, denotes rise from obscurity,
and finance will be a congenial adherent.

To see learned men, foretells that your companions will be
interesting and prominent.

For a woman to dream that she is associated in any way with learned people,
she will be ambitious and excel in her endeavors to rise into prominence.

_Leather_.

To dream of leather, denotes successful business and favorable
engagements with women.  You will go into lucky speculations
if you dream that you are dressed in leather.

Ornaments of leather, denotes faithfulness in love and to the home.

Piles of leather, denotes fortune and happiness.

To deal in leather, signifies no change in the disposition of your engagements
is necessary for successful accumulation of wealth.

_Leaves_.

To dream of leaves, denotes happiness and wonderful improvement
in your business.

Withered leaves, indicate false hopes and gloomy forebodings will harass
your spirit into a whirlpool of despondency and loss.

If a young woman dreams of withered leaves, she will be left lonely
on the road to conjugality.  Death is sometimes implied.

If the leaves are green and fresh, she will come into a legacy
and marry a wealthy and prepossessing husband.

_Ledger_.

To dream of keeping a ledger, you will have perplexities and disappointing
conditions to combat.

To dream that you make wrong entries on your ledger, you will have small
disputes and a slight loss will befall you.

To put a ledger into a safe, you will be able to protect your rights
under adverse circumstances.

To get your ledger misplaced, your interests will go awry through
neglect of duty.

To dream that your ledger gets destroyed by fire, you will suffer
through the carelessness of friends.

To dream that you have a woman to keep your ledger, you will lose
money trying to combine pleasure with business.

For a young woman to dream of ledgers, denotes she will have a solid
business man to make her a proposal of marriage.

To dream that your ledger has worthless accounts, denotes bad
management and losses; but if the accounts are good, then your
business will assume improved conditions.

_Leeches_.

To dream of leeches, foretells that enemies will run over your interests.

If they are applied to you for medicinal purposes, you will have a serious
illness tn your family (if you escape yourself).

To see them applied to others, denotes sickness or trouble to friends.

If they should bite you, there is danger for you in unexpected places,
and you should heed well this warning.

_Leeward_.

To dream of sailing leeward, denotes to the sailor a prosperous
and merry voyage.  To others, a pleasant journey.

_Legerdemain_.

To dream of practising legerdemain, or seeing others doing so,
signifies you will be placed in a position where your energy
and power of planning will be called into strenuous play
to extricate yourself.

_Legislature_.

To dream that you are a member of a legislature, foretells you will be
vain of your possessions and will treat members of your family unkindly.
You will have no real advancement.

_Legs_.

If you dream of admiring well-shaped feminine legs, you will lose
your judgment, and act very silly over some fair charmer.

To see misshapen legs, denotes unprofitable occupations
and ill-tempered comrades.

A wounded leg, foretells losses and agonizing attacks of malaria.

To dream that you have a wooden leg, denotes that you will bemean
yourself in a false way to your friends.

If ulcers are on your legs, it signifies a drain on your income
to aid others.

To dream that you have three, or more, legs, indicates that more enterprises
are planned in your imagination than will ever benefit you.

If you can't use your legs, it portends poverty.

To have a leg amputated, you will lose valued friends, and the home
influence will render life unbearable.

For a young woman to admire her own legs, denotes vanity, and she
will be repulsed by the man she admires.  If she has hairy legs,
she will dominate her husband.

If your own legs are clean and well shaped, it denotes a happy future
and devoted friends.

_Lemonade_.

If you drink lemonade in a dream, you will concur with others
in signifying some entertainment as a niggardly device to raise
funds for the personal enjoyment of others at your expense.

_Lemons_.

To dream of seeing lemons on their native trees among rich foliage,
denotes jealousy toward some beloved object, but demonstrations
will convince you of the absurdity of the charge.

To eat lemons, foretells humiliation and disappointments.

Green lemons, denotes sickness and contagion.

To see shriveled lemons, denotes divorce, if married,
and separation, to lovers.

_Lending_.

To dream that you are lending money, foretells difficulties in meeting
payments of debts and unpleasant influence in private.

To lend other articles, denotes impoverishment through generosity.

To refuse to lend things, you will be awake to your interests
and keep the respect of friends.

For others to offer to lend you articles, or money, denotes prosperity
and close friendships.

_Lentil_.

If you dream of lentils, it denotes quarrels and unhealthy surroundings.
For a young woman, this dream portends dissatisfaction with her lover,
but parental advice will cause her to accept the inevitable.

_Leopard_.

To dream of a leopard attacking you, denotes that while the future seemingly
promises fair, success holds many difficulties through misplaced confidence.

To kill one, intimates victory in your affairs.

To see one caged, denotes that enemies will surround but fail
to injure you.

To see leopards in their native place trying to escape from you,
denotes that you will be embarrassed in business or love,
but by persistent efforts you will overcome difficulties.

To dream of a leopard's skin, denotes that your interests will be endangered
by a dishonest person who will win your esteem.

_Leprosy_.

To dream that you are infected with this dread disease, foretells sickness,
by which you will lose money and incur the displeasure of others.

If you see others afflicted thus, you will meet discouraging
prospects and love will turn into indifference.

_Letter_.

To dream that you see a registered letter, foretells that some money
matters will disrupt long-established relations.

For a young woman to dream that she receives such a letter,
intimates that she will be offered a competency, but it will
not be on strictly legal, or moral grounds; others may play
towards her a dishonorable part.

To the lover, this bears heavy presentments of disagreeable mating.
His sweetheart will covet other gifts than his own.

To dream of an anonymous letter, denotes that you will receive injury
from an unsuspected source.

To write one, foretells that you will be jealous of a rival,
whom you admit to be your superior.

To dream of getting letters bearing unpleasant news, denotes difficulties
or illness.  If the news is of a joyous character, you will have many
things to be thankful for.  If the letter is affectionate, but is written
on green, or colored, paper, you will be slighted in love and business.
Despondency will envelop you.  Blue ink, denotes constancy and affection,
also bright fortune.

Red colors in a letter, imply estrangements through suspicion and jealousy,
but this may be overcome by wise maneuvering of the suspected party.

If a young woman dreams that she receives a letter from her lover and places
it near her heart, she will be worried very much by a good-looking rival.
Truthfulness is often rewarded with jealousy.

If you fail to read the letter, you will lose something either
in a business or social way.

Letters nearly always bring worry.

To have your letter intercepted, rival enemies are working to defame you.

To dream of trying to conceal a letter from your sweetheart or wife,
intimates that you are interested in unworthy occupations.

To dream of a letter with a black border, signifies distress
and the death of some relative.

To receive a letter written on black paper with white ink,
denotes that gloom and disappointment will assail you, and friendly
interposition will render small relief.  If the letter passes between
husband and wife, it means separation under sensational charges.
If lovers, look for quarrels and threats of suicide.
To business people, it denotes enviousness and covetousness.

To dream that you write a letter, denotes that you will be hasty
in condemning some one on suspicion, and regrets will follow.

A torn letter, indicates that hopeless mistakes may ruin your reputation.

To receive a letter by hand, denotes that you are acting ungenerously
towards your companions or sweetheart, and you also are not upright
in your dealings.

To dream often of receiving a letter from a friend, foretells his arrival,
or you will hear from him by letter or otherwise.

_Letter-carrier_.

If you dream of a letter-carrier coming with your letters, you will soon
receive news of an unwelcome and an unpleasant character.

To hear his whistle, denotes the unexpected arrival of a visitor.

If he passes without your mail, disappointment and sadness will befall you.

If you give him letters to mail, you will suffer injury through
envy or jealousy.

To converse with a letter-carrier, you will implicate yourself
in some scandalous proceedings.

_Letter-file_.

To see a letter-file in your dreams, is significant of important news,
which will cause you an irksome journey.  For a woman, this dream implies
distressful news and unfaithful friends.

_Lettuce_.

To see lettuce growing green and thrifty, denotes that you will enjoy
some greatly desired good, after an unimportant embarrassment.

If you eat lettuce, illness will separate you from your lover or companion,
or perhaps it may be petty jealousy.

For a woman to dream of sowing lettuce, portends she will be the cause
of her own early sickness or death.

To gather it, denotes your superabundant sensitiveness,
and that your jealous disposition will cause you unmitigated
distress and pain.

To buy lettuce, denotes that you will court your own downfall.

_Liar_.

To dream of thinking people are liars, foretells you will lose
faith in some scheme which you had urgently put forward.
For some one to call you a liar, means you will have vexations
through deceitful persons.

For a woman to think her sweetheart a liar, warns her that her unbecoming
conduct is likely to lose her a valued friend.

_Library_.

To dream that you are in a library, denotes that you will grow
discontented with your environments and associations and seek
companionship in study and the exploration of ancient customs.

To find yourself in a library for other purpose than study,
foretells that your conduct will deceive your friends, and where
you would have them believe that you had literary aspirations,
you will find illicit assignations.

_Lice_.

A dream of lice contains much waking worry and distress.
It often implies offensive ailments.

Lice on stock, foretells famine and loss.

To have lice on your body, denotes that you will conduct yourself
unpleasantly with your acquaintances.

To dream of catching lice, foretells sickness, and that you
will cultivate morbidity.

_License_.

To dream of a license, is an omen of disputes and loss.
Married women will exasperate your cheerfulness.  For a woman
to see a marriage license, foretells that she will soon enter
unpleasant bonds, which will humiliate her pride.

_Life-boat_.

To dream of being in a life-boat, denotes escape from threatened evil.

To see a life-boat sinking, friends will contribute to your distress.

To be lost in a life-boat, you will be overcome with trouble,
in which your friends will be included to some extent.
If you are saved, you will escape a great calamity.

_Life-insurance Man_.

To see life-insurance men in a dream, means that you are soon
to meet a stranger who will contribute to your business interests,
and change in your home life is foreshadowed, as interests
will be mutual.

If they appear distorted or unnatural, the dream is more
unfortunate than good.

_Light_.

If you dream of light, success will attend you.  To dream of weird light,
or if the light goes out, you will be disagreeably surprised by some
undertaking resulting in nothing.

To see a dim light, indicates partial success.

_Lighthouse_.

If you see a lighthouse through a storm, difficulties and grief will
assail you, but they will disperse before prosperity and happiness.

To see a lighthouse from a placid sea, denotes calm joys
and congenial friends.

_Lightning_.

Lightning in your dreams, foreshadows happiness and prosperity
of short duration.

If the lightning strikes some object near you, and you feel
the shock, you will be damaged by the good fortune of a friend,
or you may be worried by gossipers and scandalmongers.

To see livid lightning parting black clouds, sorrow and difficulties
will follow close on to fortune.

If it strikes you, unexpected sorrows will overwhelm you in business or love.

To see the lightning above your head, heralds the advent of joy and gain.

To see lightning in the south, fortune will hide herself from you for awhile.

If in the southwest, luck will come your way.  In the west,
your prospects will be brighter than formally.  In the north,
obstacles will have to be removed before your prospects will
brighten up.  If in the east, you will easily win favors and fortune.
Lightning from dark and ominous-looking clouds, is always
a forerunner of threats, of loss and of disappointments.
Business men should stay close to business, and women near
their husbands or mothers; children and the sick should be
looked after closely.

_Lightning-rod_.

To see a lightning-rod, denotes that threatened destruction to some
cherished work will confront you.  To see one change into a serpent,
foretells enemies will succeed in their schemes against you.
If the lightning strikes one, there will be an accident or sudden
news to give you sorrow.

If you are having one put up, it is a warning to beware how you begin
a new enterprise, as you will likely be overtaken by disappointment.

To have them taken down, you will change your plans and
thereby further your interests.  To see many lightning rods,
indicates a variety of misfortunes.

_Lily_.

To dream of a lily, denotes much chastisement through illness and death.
To see lilies growing with their rich foliage, denotes early marriage
to the young and subsequent separation through death.

To see little children among the flowers, indicates sickness
and fragile constitutions to these little ones.

For a young woman to dream of admiring, or gathering, lilies,
denotes much sadness coupled with joy, as the one she loves
will have great physical suffering, if not an early dissolution.
If she sees them withered, sorrow is even nearer than she
could have suspected.

To dream that you breathe the fragrance of lilies, denotes that sorrow
will purify and enhance your mental qualities.

_Lime_.

To dream of lime, foretells that disaster will prostrate you for a time,
but you will revive to greater and richer prosperity than before.

_Lime-kiln_.

To dream of a lime-kiln, foretells the immediate future holds
no favor for speculations in love or business

_Limes_.

To dream of eating limes, foretells continued sickness and adverse straits.

_Limp_.[114]

To dream that you limp in your walk, denotes that a small worry will
unexpectedly confront you, detracting much from your enjoyment.

To see others limping, signifies that you will be naturally offended
at the conduct of a friend.  Small failures attend this dream.


[114] See Cripple and Lamed.

_Linen_.

To see linen in your dream, augurs prosperity and enjoyment.

If a person appears to you dressed in linen garments, you will shortly
be the recipient of joyful tidings in the nature of an inheritance.

If you are apparelled in clean, fine linen, your fortune and fullest

Back to Full Books