The Adventures of Hugh TrevorbyThomas Holcroft

have delighted in revenge, I might have satiated myself with that
unworthy and destructive passion. The committee, appointed to decide
on the election, voted the Idford candidate guilty of bribery and
corruption. The fortune of the Earl, like that of Hector, has suffered
depredations which half a century will probably not repair. The
new-made peer and his party daily became so obnoxious to the nation,
by the destructive tendency of their measures, that they were and
continue to be haunted by terrors that deprive them of the faculties
common to man. My heart bears witness for me that I do not speak this
in triumph. I should be no less vicious than unworthy, could I triumph
in the misfortunes of any human being: but I were a wretch indeed,
were I to make mistakes that are the scourge of mankind a subject of
exultation.

Must I repeat more names? Is it necessary to say the virtues of Turl
and Wilmot are too splendid to need my praise: or that my social hours
are most beneficially and delightfully spent in their society? That
I have amply provided for the generous-minded Clarke? That Philip is
once more the good and faithful servant of a kind mistress? That Mary
and her son are equally objects of my attention? And that I do not
mean to boast of these things as acts of munificence: but as the
performance of duties?

This were unnecessary. Neither shall I be required to particularize
the present happiness of Lydia, now Mrs. Wakefield; and of that man of
brilliant and astonishing faculties who is her affectionate companion
and friend, and from whose exertions, if I am not strangely mistaken,
the world has so much to profit and so much to expect. Like me, he is
in the enjoyment of affluence; and he enjoys it with a liberal and
munificent spirit. Are there any who hate him, because he once was
guilty of hateful crimes? I hope not. It is a spirit that would sweep
away half the inhabitants of the 'peopled earth.' For my own part, I
delight in his conversation, am enlivened by his wit, and prompted to
enquiry by the acuteness of his remarks. He is a man whom I am proud
to say I love.

I have told my tale. If it should afford instruction, if it should
inspire a love of virtue, briefly, if it should contribute to the
happiness of mankind, I shall have gained my purpose. My labours will
be most richly rewarded.





Back to Full Books