10,000 Dreams Interpreted [Or. . ."What's In A Dream"] [Or. . .Dreams, Their Scientific and Practical Interpretations]

fair one's artfulness.

_Secret Order_.

To dream of any secret order, denotes a sensitive and excited organism,
and the owner should cultivate practical and unselfish ideas and they may soon
have opportunities for honest pleasures, and desired literary distinctions.

There is a vision of selfish and designing friendships for one who joins
a secret order.

Young women should heed the counsel of their guardians,
lest they fall into discreditable habits after this dream.

If a young woman meets the head of the order, she should oppose
with energy and moral rectitude against allurements that are
set brilliantly and prominently before those of her sex.
For her to think her mother has joined the order, and she is
using her best efforts to have her mother repudiate her vows,
denotes that she will be full of love for her parents, yet will
wring their hearts with anguish by thoughtless disobedience.

To see or hear that the leader is dead, foretells severe strains,
and trials will eventually end in comparative good.

_Seducer_.

For a young woman to dream of being seduced, foretells that she
will be easily influenced by showy persons.

For a man to dream that he has seduced a girl, is a warning for him
to be on his guard, as there are those who will falsely accuse him.
If his sweetheart appears shocked or angry under these proposals,
he will find that the woman he loves is above reproach.
If she consents, he is being used for her pecuniary pleasures.

_Seed_.

To dream of seed, foretells increasing prosperity, though present
indications appear unfavorable.

_Sentry_.

To dream of a sentry, denotes that you will have kind protectors,
and your life will be smoothly conducted.

_Serenade_.

To hear a serenade in your dream, you will have pleasant news
from absent friends, and your anticipations will not fail you.

If you are one of the serenaders, there are many delightful things
in your future.

_Serpents_.[199]

To dream of serpents, is indicative of cultivated morbidity
and depressed surroundings.  There is usually a disappointment
after this dream.


[199] See Snakes and Reptiles.

_Servant_.

To dream of a servant, is a sign that you will be fortunate,
despite gloomy appearances.  Anger is likely to precipitate
you into useless worries and quarrels.

To discharge one, foretells regrets and losses.

To quarrel with one in your dream, indicates that you will, upon waking,
have real cause for censuring some one who is derelict in duty.

To be robbed by one, shows that you have some one near you,
who does not respect the laws of ownership.

_Sewing_.

To dream of sewing on new garments, foretells that domestic peace
will crown your wishes.

_Shakers_.

To dream of seeing members of the sect called Shakers in a dream,
denotes that you will change in your business, and feel coldness
growing towards your sweetheart.

If you imagine you belong to them, you will unexpectedly renounce
all former ties, and seek new pleasures in distant localities.

_Shaking Hands_.

For a young woman to dream that she shakes hands with some prominent ruler,
foretells she will be surrounded with pleasures and distinction
from strangers.  If she avails herself of the opportunity,
she will stand in high favor with friends.  If she finds she must
reach up to shake hands, she will find rivalry and opposition.
If she has on gloves, she will overcome these obstacles.

To shake hands with those beneath you, denotes you will
be loved and honored for your kindness and benevolence.
If you think you or they have soiled hands, you will find
enemies among seeming friends.

For a young woman to dream of shaking hands with a decrepit old man,
foretells she will find trouble where amusement was sought.

_Shakspeare_.

To dream of Shakspeare, denotes that unhappiness and dispondency
will work much anxiety to momentous affairs, and love will be stripped
of passion's fever.

To read Shakspeare's works, denotes that you will unalterably
attach yourself to literary accomplishments.

_Shampoo_.

To dream of seeing shampooing going on, denotes that you will engage
in undignified affairs to please others

To have your own head shampooed, you will soon make a secret trip,
in which you will have much enjoyment, if you succeed in keeping
the real purport from your family or friends.

_Shanty_.

To dream of a shanty, denotes that you will leave home in the quest
of health.  This also warns you of decreasing prosperity.

_Shark_.

To dream of sharks, denotes formidable enemies.

To see a shark pursuing and attacking you, denotes that unavoidable
reverses will sink you into dispondent foreboding.

To see them sporting in clear water, foretells that while you are basking
in the sunshine of women and prosperity, jealousy is secretly, but surely,
working you disquiet, and unhappy fortune.

To see a dead one, denotes reconciliation and renewed prosperity.

_Shave_.

To merely contemplate getting a shave, in your dream, denotes you
will plan for the successful development of enterprises,
but will fail to generate energy sufficient to succeed.

_Shaving_.

To dream that you are being shaved, portends that you will let
imposters defraud you.

To shave yourself, foretells that you will govern your own business
and dictate to your household, notwithstanding that the presence
of a shrew may cause you quarrels.

If your face appears smooth, you will enjoy quiet, and your conduct
will hot be questioned by your companions.  If old and rough,
there will be many squalls or, the matrimonial sea.

If your razor is dull and pulls your face, you will give your friends
cause to criticize your private life.

If your beard seems gray, you will be absolutely devoid of any sense
of justice to those having claims upon you.

For a woman to see men shaving, foretells that her nature will become
sullied by indulgence in gross pleasures.

If she dreams of being shaved, she will assume so much masculinity that men
will turn from her in disgust.

_Shawl_.

To dream of a shawl, denotes that some one will offer you flattery and favor.

To lose your shawl, foretells sorrow and discomfort.
A young woman is in danger of being jilted by a good-looking man,
after this dream.

_Shears_.

To see shears in your dream, denotes that you will become miserly
and disagreeable in your dealings.

To see them broken, you will lose friends and standing by
your eccentric demeanor.

_Sheaves_.

To dream of sheaves, denotes joyful occasions.
Prosperity holds before you a panorama of delightful events,
and fields of enterprise and fortunate gain.

_Sheep_.[200]

To dream of shearing them, denotes a season of profitable enterprises
will shower down upon you.

To see flocks of sheep, there will be much rejoicing among farmers,
and other trades will prosper.

To see them looking scraggy and sick, you will be thrown into despair
by the miscarriage of some plan, which promised rich returns.

To eat the flesh of sheep, denotes that ill-natured persons
will outrage your feelings.


[200] See Lamb and Ram.

_Sheet Iron_.

To see sheet iron in your dream, denotes you are unfortunately
listening to the admonition of others.  To walk on it,
signifies distasteful engagements.

_Shells_.[201]

To walk among and gather shells in your dream, denotes extravagance.
Pleasure will leave you naught but exasperating regrets and memories.


[201] See Mussels and Oysters.

_Shelter_.

To dream that you are building a shelter, signifies that you
will escape the evil designs of enemies.

If you are seeking shelter, you will be guilty of cheating,
and will try to justify yourself.

_Shelves_.[202]

To see empty shelves in dreams, indicates losses and consequent gloom.

Full shelves, augurs happy contentment through the fulfillment
of hope and exertions.


[202] See Store.

_Shepherd_.

To see shepherds in your dreams watching their flocks,
portends bounteous crops and pleasant relations for the farmer,
also much enjoyment and profit for others.

To see them in idleness, foretells sickness and bereavement.

_Sheriff_.[203]

To dream of seeing a sheriff, denotes that you will suffer great uneasiness
over the uncertain changes which loom up before you.

To imagine that you are elected sheriff or feel interested in the office,
denotes that you will participate in some affair which will afford you
neither profit nor honor.

To escape arrest, you will be able to further engage in illicit affairs.


[203] See Bailiff and Police.

_Ship_.

To dream of ships, foretells honor and unexpected elevation to ranks
above your mode of life.

To hear of a shipwreck is ominous of a disastrous turn in affairs.
Your female friends will betray you.

To lose your life in one, denotes that you will have an exceeding
close call on your life or honor.

To see a ship on her way through a tempestuous storm,
foretells that you will be unfortunate in business transactions,
and you will be perplexed to find means of hiding some intrigue
from the public, as your partner in the affair will threaten
you with betrayal.

To see others shipwrecked, you will seek in vain to shelter some friend
from disgrace and insolvency.

_Shirt_.

To dream of putting on your shirt, is a sign that you will estrange
yourself from your sweetheart by your faithless conduct.

To lose your shirt, augurs disgrace in business or love.

A torn shirt, represents misfortune and miserable surroundings.

A soiled shirt, denotes that contagious diseases will confront you.

_Shirt-studs_.

To dream of shirt-studs, foretells you will struggle to humor your pride,
and will usually be successful.  If they are diamonds, and the center one
is larger than the others, you will enjoy wealth, or have an easy time,
surrounded by congenial friends.

_Shoemaker_.

To see a shoemaker in your dream, warns you that indications are
unfavorable to your advancement.  For a woman to dream that her
husband or lover is a shoemaker, foretells competency will be hers;
her wishes will be gratified.

_Shoes_.

To dream of seeing your shoes ragged and soiled, denotes that you
will make enemies by your unfeeling criticisms.

To have them blacked in your dreams, foretells improvement in your affairs,
and some important event will cause you satisfaction.

New shoes, augur changes which will prove beneficial.
If they pinch your feet, you will be uncomfortably exposed
to the practical joking of the fun-loving companions of your sex.

To find them untied, denotes losses, quarrels and ill-health.


To lose them, is a sign of desertion and divorces.

To dream that your shoes have been stolen during the night,
but you have two pairs of hose, denotes you will have a loss,
but will gain in some other pursuit.

For a young woman to dream that her shoes are admired while on her feet,
warns her to be cautious in allowing newly introduced people, and men
of any kind, to approach her in a familiar way.

_Shooting_.[204]

To dream that you see or hear shooting, signifies unhappiness between
married couples and sweethearts because of over-weaning selfishness,
also unsatisfactory business and tasks because of negligence.


[204] See Pistol.

_Shop_.[205]

To dream of a shop, denotes that you will be opposed in every attempt
you make for advancement by scheming and jealous friends.


[205] See Store.

_Shot_.

To dream that you are shot, and are feeling the sensations of dying,
denotes that you are to meet unexpected abuse from the ill feelings
of friends, but if you escape death by waking, you will be fully
reconciled with them later on.

To dream that a preacher shoots you, signifies that you will be annoyed
by some friend advancing views condemnatory to those entertained by yourself.

_Shotgun_.[206]

To dream of a shotgun, foretells domestic troubles and worry
with children and servants.

To shoot both barrels of a double-barreled shotgun, foretells that you will
meet such exasperating and unfeeling attention in your private and public
life that suave manners giving way under the strain and your righteous wrath
will be justifiable.

[206] See Pistol, Revolver, etc.

_Shoulder_.

To dream of seeing naked shoulders, foretells that happy changes will make
you look upon the world in a different light than formerly.

To see your own shoulders appearing thin, denotes that you will depend upon
the caprices of others for entertainment and pleasure.

_Shovel_.

To see a shovel in a dream, signifies laborious but withal
pleasant work will be undertaken.  A broken or old one,
implies frustration of hopes.

_Shower_.[207]

To dream that you are in a shower, foretells that you will derive
exquisite pleasure in the study of creation and the proper placing
of selfish pleasures.


[207] See Rain.

_Shrew_.

To dream of a shrew, foretells that you will have a task to keep
some friend in a cheerful frame of mind, and that you will unfit
yourself for the experiences of everyday existence.

_Shroud_.

To dream of a shroud, denotes sickness and its attendant distress and anxiety,
coupled with the machinations of the evil-minded and false friends.
Business will threaten decline after this dream.

To see shrouded corpses, denotes a multitude of misfortunes.

To see a shroud removed from a corpse, denotes that quarrels
will result in alienation.

_Sickness_.

To dream of sickness, is a sign of trouble and real sickness in your family.
Discord is sure to find entrance also.

To dream of your own sickness, is a warning to be unusually cautious
of your person.

To see any of your family pale and sick, foretells that some
event will break unexpectedly upon your harmonious hearthstone.
Sickness is usually attendant upon this dream.

_Side_.

To dream of seeing only the side of any object, denotes that some person
is going to treat your honest proposals with indifference.

To dream that your side pains you, there will be vexations in your affairs
that will gall your endurance.

To dream that you have a fleshy, healthy side, you will be successful
in courtship and business.

_Siege_.

For a young woman to dream that she is in a siege, and sees cavalry
around her, denotes that she will have serious drawbacks to enjoyments,
but will surmount them finally, and receive much pleasure and profit
from seeming disappointments.

_Sieve_.

To dream of a sieve, foretells some annoying transaction will soon be made
by you, which will probably be to your loss.  If the meshes are too small,
you will have the chance to reverse a decision unfavorable to yourself.
If too large, you will eventually lose what you have recently acquired.

_Sigh_.

To dream that you are sighing over any trouble or sad event,
denotes that you will have unexpected sadness, but some redeeming
brightness in your season of trouble.

To hear the sighing of others, foretells that the misconduct
of dear friends will oppress you with a weight of gloom.

_Silk_.

To dream of wearing silk clothes, is a sign of high ambitions being gratified,
and friendly relations will be established between those who were estranged.

For a young woman to dream of old silk, denotes that she will have much
pride in her ancestors, and will be wooed by a wealthy, but elderly person.
If the silk is soiled or torn, she will drag her ancestral pride in
the slums of disgrace.

_Silkworm_.

If you dream of a silkworm, you will engage in a very profitable work,
which will also place you in a prominent position.

To see them dead, or cutting through their cocoons, is a sign
of reverses and trying times.

_Silver_.

To dream of silver, is a warning against depending too largely on money
for real happiness and contentment.

To find silver money, is indicative of shortcomings in others.
Hasty conclusions are too frequently drawn by yourself for your own
peace of mind.

To dream of silverware, denotes worries and unsatisfied desires.

_Single_.

For married persons to dream that they are single, foretells that their union
will not be harmonious, and constant despondency will confront them.

_Singing_.

To hear singing in your dreams, betokens a cheerful spirit
and happy companions.  You are soon to have promising news
from the absent.

If you are singing while everything around you gives promise of happiness,
jealousy will insinuate a sense of insincerity into your joyousness.
If there are notes of sadness in the song, you will be unpleasantly
surprised at the turn your affairs will take.

Ribald songs, signifies gruesome and extravagant waste.

_Skate_.

To dream that you are skating on ice, foretells that you
are in danger of losing employment, or valuable articles.
If you break through the ice, you will have unworthy friends
to counsel you.

To see others skating, foretells that disagreeable people will connect
your name in scandal with some person who admires you.

To see skates, denotes discord among your associates.

To see young people skating on roller skates, foretells that you
will enjoy good health, and feel enthusiastic over the pleasures
you are able to contribute to others.

_Skeleton_.

To dream of seeing a skeleton, is prognostic of illness, misunderstanding and
injury at the hands of others, especially enemies.

To dream that you are a skeleton, is a sign that you are suffering
under useless worry, and should cultivate a milder disposition.

If you imagine that one haunts you, there will soon come to you
a shocking accident or death, or the trouble may take the form
of financial disaster.

_Skull_.

To dream of skulls grinning at you, is a sign of domestic quarrels and jars.
Business will feel a shrinkage if you handle them.

To see a friend's skull, denotes that you will receive injury
from a friend because of your being preferred to him.

To see your own skull, denotes that you will be the servant of remorse.

_Sky_.[208]

To dream of the sky, signifies distinguished honors and interesting travel
with cultured companions, if the sky is clear.  Otherwise, it portends
blasted expectations, and trouble with women.

To dream of floating in the sky among weird faces and animals,
and wondering all the while if you are really awake, or only dreaming,
foretells that all trouble, the most excruciating pain,
that reach even the dullest sense will be distilled into one drop
called jealousy, and will be inserted into your faithful love,
and loyalty will suffer dethronement.

To see the sky turn red, indicates that public disquiet and rioting
may be expected.


[208] See Heaven and Illumination.

_Slander_.

To dream that you are slandered, is a sign of your untruthful
dealings with ignorance.

If you slander any one, you will feel the loss of friends through selfishness.

_Slaughter-house_.[209]

To dream of a slaughter-house, denotes that you will be
feared more than loved by your sweetheart or mistress.
Your business will divulge a private drain, and there will
be unkind insinuations.


[209] See Butcher.

_Sleep_.

To dream of sleeping on clean, fresh beds, denotes peace and favor
from those whom you love.

To sleep in unnatural resting places, foretells sickness
and broken engagements.

To sleep beside a little child, betokens domestic joys and reciprocated love.

To see others sleeping, you will overcome all opposition in your pursuit
for woman's favor.

To dream of sleeping with a repulsive person or object,
warns you that your love will wane before that of your sweetheart,
and you will suffer for your escapades.

For a young woman to dream of sleeping with her lover or some
fascinating object, warns her against yielding herself a willing
victim to his charms.

_Sleigh_.

To see a sleigh in your dreams, foretells you will fail in
some love adventure, and incur the displeasure of a friend.
To ride in one, foretells injudicious engagements will be entered
into by you.

_Sliding_.

To dream of sliding, portends disappointments in affairs,
and sweethearts will break vows.

To slide down a hillside covered with green grass, foretells that you
will be deceived into ruin by flattering promises.

_Slighted_.

To dream of slighting any person or friend, denotes that you
will fail to find happiness, as you will cultivate a morose
and repellent bearing.

If you are slighted, you will have cause to bemoan your unfortunate position.

_Slippers_.

To dream of slippers, warns you that you are about to perform
an unfortunate alliance or intrigue.  You are likely to find
favor with a married person which will result in trouble,
if not scandal.

To dream that your slippers are much admired, foretells that you
will be involved in a flirtation, which will suggest disgrace.

_Smallpox_.

To see people with smallpox in your dream, denotes unexpected
and shocking sickness, and probably contagion.  You will meet
failure in accomplishing your designs.

_Smoke_.

To dream of smoke, foretells that you will be perplexed with doubts and fears.

To be overcome with smoke, denotes that dangerous persons are victimizing
you with flattery.

_Snakes_.[210]

For a woman to dream that a dead snake is biting her, foretells she
will suffer from malice of a pretended friend.

To dream of snakes, is a foreboding of evil in its various forms and stages.

To see them wriggling and falling over others, foretells struggles
with fortune and remorse.

To kill them, you will feel that you have used every opportunity
of advancing your own interests, or respecting that of others.
You will enjoy victory over enemies.

To walk over them, you will live in constant fear of sickness, and selfish
persons will seek to usurp your place in your companion's life.

If they bite you, you will succumb to evil influences, and enemies
will injure your business.

To dream that a common spotted snake approaches you from green herbs,
and you quickly step aside as it passes you, and after you had forgotten
the incident to again see it approaching and growing in dimensions
as it nears you, finally taking on the form of an enormous serpent;
if you then, after frantic efforts, succeed in escaping its attack,
and altogether lose sight of it, it foretells that you will soon
imagine you are being disobeyed and slighted, and things will go on
from bad to worse.  Sickness, uneasiness and unkindness will increase
to frightful proportions in your mind; but they will adjust themselves
to a normal basis, and by the putting aside of imaginary trouble,
and masterfully shouldering duties, you will be contented and repaid.

To dream that a snake coils itself around you and darts its tongue out at you,
is a sign that you will be placed in a position where you will be powerless
in the hands of enemies, and you will be attacked with sickness.

To handle them, you will use strategy to aid in overthrowing opposition.

To see hairs turn into snakes, foretells that seeming insignificant
incidents will make distressing cares for you.

If snakes turn into unnatural shapes, you will have troubles which will
be dispelled if treated with indifference, calmness and will power.

To see or step on snakes while wading or bathing, denotes that there
will be trouble where unalloyed pleasure was anticipated.

To see them bite others, foretells that some friend will be injured
and criticised by you.

To see little snakes, denotes you will entertain persons
with friendly hospitality who will secretly defame you and work
to overthrow your growing prospects.

To see children playing with them, is a sign that you will be
nonplussed to distinguish your friends from your enemies.
For a woman to think a child places one on the back of her head,
and she hears the snake's hisses, foretells that she will be
persuaded to yield up some possession seemingly for her good,
but she will find out later that she has been inveigled
into an intrigue in which enemies will tantalize her.
To see snakes raising up their heads in a path just behind
your friend, denotes that you will discover a conspiracy
which has been formed to injure your friend and also yourself.
To think your friend has them under control, denotes that
some powerful agency will be employed in your favor to ward
off evil influences.

For a woman to hypnotize a snake, denotes your rights will be assailed,
but you will be protected by law and influential friends.


[210] See Serpents and Reptiles.

_Snail_.

Snails crawling in your dream, signifies that unhealthful
conditions surround you.

To step on them, denotes that you will come in contact
with disagreeable people.

_Sneeze_.

To dream that you sneeze, denotes that hasty tidings will cause
you to change your plans.

To see or hear others sneeze, some people will bore you with visits.

_Snouts_.

To dream of snouts, foretells dangerous seasons for you.
Enemies are surrounding you, and difficulties will be numerous.

_Snow_.

To see snow in your dreams, denotes that while you have no real misfortune,
there will be the appearance of illness, and unsatisfactory enterprises.

To find yourself in a snow storm, denotes sorrow and disappointment
in failure to enjoy some long-expected pleasure.  There always follows
more or less discouragement after this dream.

If you eat snow, you will fail to realize ideals.

To see dirty snow, foretells that your pride will be humbled,
and you will seek reconciliation with some person whom you held
in haughty contempt.

To see it melt, your fears will turn into joy.

To see large, white snowflakes falling while looking through a window,
foretells that you will have an angry interview with your sweetheart,
and the estrangement will be aggravated by financial depression.

To see snow-capped mountains in the distance, warns you that your longings
and ambitions will bring no worthy advancement.

To see the sun shining through landscapes of snow, foretells that you
will conquer adverse fortune and possess yourself of power.

For a young woman to dream of sleighing, she will find much opposition
to her choice of a lover, and her conduct will cause her much ill-favor.

To dream of snowballing, denotes that you will have to struggle
with dishonorable issues, and if your judgment is not well grounded,
you will suffer defeat.

If snowbound or lost, there will be constant waves of ill luck breaking
in upon you.

_Snuff_.

To dream of snuff, signifies your enemies are seducing the confidence of
your friends.  For a woman to use it in her dreams, foretells complications
which will involve her separation from a favored friend.

_Soap_.

To dream of soap, foretells that friendships will reveal
interesting entertainment.  Farmers will have success in
their varied affairs.

For a young woman to be making soap, omens a substantial and satisfactory
competency will be hers.

_Socialist_.

To see a socialist in your dreams, your unenvied position among
friends and acquaintances is predicted.  Your affairs will be
neglected for other imaginary duties.

_Soda Fountain_.

To dream of being at a soda fountain, denotes pleasure and profit
after many exasperating experiences.

To treat others to this and other delectable iced drinks; you will be
rewarded in your efforts, though the outlook appears full of contradictions.
Inharmonious environments, and desired results will be forthcoming.

_Son_.

To dream of your son, if you have one, as being handsome and dutiful,
foretells that he will afford you proud satisfaction, and will aspire
to high honors.  If he is maimed, or suffering from illness or accident,
there is trouble ahead for you.

For a mother to dream that her son has fallen to the bottom of a well,
and she hears cries, it is a sign of deep grief, losses and sickness.
If she rescues him, threatened danger will pass away unexpectedly.

_Soot_.

If you see soot in your dreams, it means that you will meet with ill success
in your affairs.  Lovers will be quarrelsome and hard to please.

_Sold_.

To dream that you have sold anything, denotes that unfavorable business
will worry you.

_Soldiers_.

To see soldiers marching in your dreams, foretells for you a period
of flagrant excesses, but at the same time you will be promoted
to elevations above rivals.

To see wounded soldiers, is a sign of the misfortune of
others causing you serious complications in your affairs.
Your sympathy will outstrip your judgment.

To dream that you are a worthy soldier, you will have literal
fulfilment of ideals.  Women are in danger of disrepute if they
find themselves dreaming of soldiers.

_Somnambulist_.

To imagine while dreaming that you are a somnambulist, portends that you
will unwittingly consent to some agreement of plans which will bring you
anxiety or ill fortune.

_Sorcerer_.

To dream of a sorcerer, foretells your ambitions will undergo
strange disappointments and change.

_Sores_.

To dream of seeing sores, denotes that illness will cause you
loss and mental distress.

To dress a sore, foretells that your personal wishes and desires
will give place to the pleasure of others.

To dream of an infant having a deep sore so that you can see the bone,
denotes that distressing and annoying incidents will detract from your plans,
and children will be threatened with contagion.

To dream of sores on yourself, portends early decay of health
and impaired mentality.  Sickness and unsatisfactory business
will follow this dream.

_Soul_.

To dream of seeing your soul leaving your body, signifies you
are in danger of sacrificing yourself to useless designs,
which will dwarf your sense of honor and cause you to become
mercenary and uncharitable.

For an artist to see his soul in another, foretells he will gain distinction
if he applies himself to his work and leaves off sentimental ro^les.

To imagine another's soul is in you, denotes you will derive solace
and benefit from some stranger who is yet to come into your life.

For a young woman musician to dream that she sees another young
woman on the stage clothed in sheer robes, and imagining it is
her own soul in the other person, denotes she will be outrivaled
in some great undertaking.

To dream that you are discussing the immortality of your soul,
denotes you will improve opportunities which will aid you
in gaining desired knowledge and pleasure of intercourse
with intellectual people.

_Soup_.

To dream of soup, is a forerunner of good tidings and comfort.

To see others taking soup, foretells that you will have many good
chances to marry.

For a young woman to make soup, signifies that she will not be compelled
to do menial work in her household, as she will marry a wealthy man.

To drink oyster soup made of sweet milk, there will be quarrels
with some bad luck, but reconciliations will follow.

_Sovereign_.

To dream of a sovereign, denotes increasing prosperity and new friends.

_Sowing_.

To dream that you are sowing seed, foretells to the farmer fruitful promises,
if he sows in new ploughed soil.

To see others sowing, much business activity is portended,
which will bring gain to all.

_Spade_.

To dream of a kind of shovel called spade, denotes that you will have work
to complete, which will give you much annoyance in superintending.

If you dream of cards named spades, you will be enticed into follies
which will bring you grief and misfortune.

For a gambler to dream that spades are trumps, means that unfortunate
deals will deplete his winnings.

_Sparrow_.

To dream of sparrows, denotes that you will be surrounded with love
and comfort, and this will cause you to listen with kindly interest
to tales of woe, and your benevolence will gain you popularity.

To see them distressed or wounded, foretells sadness.

_Spectacles_.

To dream of spectacles, foretells that strangers will cause changes
in your affairs.  Frauds will be practised on your credulity.

To dream that you see broken spectacles, denotes estrangement
caused by fondness for illegal pleasures.

_Spice_.

To dream of spice, foretells you will probably damage your own reputation
in search of pleasure.  For a young woman to dream of eating spice,
is an omen of deceitful appearances winning her confidence.

_Spider_.

To dream of a spider, denotes that you will be careful and energetic
in your labors, and fortune will be amassed to pleasing proportions.

To see one building its web, foretells that you will be happy
and secure in your own home.

To kill one, signifies quarrels with your wife or sweetheart.

If one bites you, you will be the victim of unfaithfulness and will suffer
from enemies in your business.

If you dream that you see many spiders hanging in their webs around you,
foretells most favorable conditions, fortune, good health and friends.

To dream of a large spider confronting you, signifies that your elevation
to fortune will be swift, unless you are in dangerous contact.

To dream that you see a very large spider and a small one coming
towards you, denotes that you will be prosperous, and that you
will feel for a time that you are immensely successful; but if
the large one bites you, enemies will steal away your good fortune.
If the little one bites you, you will be harassed with little spites
and jealousies.  To imagine that you are running from a large spider,
denotes you will lose fortune in slighting opportunities.
If you kill the spider you will eventually come into fair estate.
If it afterwards returns to life and pursues you, you will be
oppressed by sickness and wavering fortunes.

For a young woman to dream she sees gold spiders crawling around her,
foretells that her fortune and prospect for happiness will improve,
and new friends will surround her.

_Spider-web_.

To see spider-webs, denotes pleasant associations and fortunate ventures.

_Spinning_.

To dream that you are spinning, means that you will engage in some enterprise,
which will be all you could wish.

_Spirit or Specter_.

To see spirits in a dream, denotes that some unexpected trouble will
confront you.  If they are white-robed, the health of your nearest friend
is threatened, or some business speculation will be disapproving.
If they are robed in black, you will meet with treachery and unfaithfulness.

If a spirit speaks, there is some evil near you, which you might avert
if you would listen to the counsels of judgment.

To dream that you hear spirits knocking on doors or walls,
denotes that trouble will arise unexpectedly.

To see them moving draperies, or moving behind them, is a warning to hold
control over your feelings, as you are likely to commit indiscretions.
Quarrels are also threatened.

To see the spirit of your friend floating in your room,
foretells disappointment and insecurity.

To hear music supposedly coming from spirits, denotes unfavorable
changes and sadness in the household.

_Spitting_.

To dream of spitting, denotes unhappy terminations of seemingly
auspicious undertakings.  For some one to spit on you,
foretells disagreements and alienation of affections.

_Spleen_.

To dream of spleen, denotes that you will have a misunderstanding
with some party who will injure you.

_Splendor_.

To dream that you live in splendor, denotes that you will succeed
to elevations, and will reside in a different state to the one
you now occupy.

To see others thus living, signifies pleasure derived from the interest
that friends take in your welfare.

_Splinter_.

To dream of splinters sticking into your flesh, denotes that you will have
many vexations from members of your family or from jealous rivals.

If while you are visiting you stick a splinter in your foot, you will
soon make, or receive, a visit which will prove extremely unpleasant.
Your affairs will go slightly wrong through your continued neglect.

_Sponges_.

Sponges seen in a dream, denote that deception is being practised upon you.

To use one in erasing, you will be the victim of folly.

_Spools_.

To dream of spools of thread, indicates some long and arduous tasks,
but which when completed will meet your most sanguine expectations.
If they are empty, there will be disappointments for you.

_Spoons_.

To see, or use, spoons in a dream, denotes favorable signs of advancement.
Domestic affairs will afford contentment.

To think a spoon is lost, denotes that you will be suspicious
of wrong doing.

To steal one, is a sign that you will deserve censure for your contemptible
meanness in your home.

To dream of broken or soiled spoons, signifies loss and trouble.

_Spring_.

To dream that spring is advancing, is a sign of fortunate undertakings
and cheerful companions.

To see spring appearing unnaturally, is a foreboding of disquiet and losses.

_Spur_.

To dream of wearing spurs, denotes that you will engage
in some unpleasant controversy.

To see others with them on, foretells that enmity is working you trouble.

_Spy_.

To dream that spies are harassing you, denotes dangerous
quarrels and uneasiness.

To dream that you are a spy, denotes that you will make unfortunate ventures.

_Spy-glass_.

To dream that you are looking through a spy-glass, denotes that changes
will soon occur to your disadvantage.

To see a broken or imperfect one, foretells unhappy dissensions
and loss of friends.

_Squall_.

To dream of squalls, foretells disappointing business and unhappiness.

_Squinting_.

To dream that you see some person with squinting eyes, denotes that you
will be annoyed with unpleasant people.

For a man to dream that his sweetheart, or some good-looking girl,
squints her eyes at him, foretells that he is threatened with loss
by seeking the favors of women.  For a young woman to have this dream
about men, she will be in danger of losing her fair reputation.

_Squirrel_.

To dream of seeing squirrels, denotes that pleasant friends will soon
visit you.  You will see advancement in your business also.

To kill a squirrel, denotes that you will be unfriendly and disliked.

To pet one, signifies family joy.

To see a dog chasing one, foretells disagreements and
unpleasantness among friends.

_Stable_.

To dream of a stable, is a sign of fortune and advantageous surroundings.

To see a stable burning denotes successful changes, or it may be seen
in actual life.

_Stag_.

To see stags in your dream, foretells that you will have honest
and true friends, and will enjoy delightful entertainments.

_Stage Driver_.

To dream of a stage driver, signifies you will go on a strange
journey in quest of fortune and happiness.

_Stain_.

To see stain on your hands, or clothing, while dreaming,
foretells that trouble over small matters will assail you.

To see a stain on the garments of others, or on their flesh,
foretells that some person will betray you.

_Stairs_.

To dream of passing up a stairs, foretells good fortune and much happiness.

If you fall down stairs, you will be the object of hatred and envy.

To walk down, you will be unlucky in your affairs, and your lovemaking
will be unfavorable.

To see broad, handsome stairs, foretells approaching riches and honors.

To see others going down stairs, denotes that unpleasant conditions
will take the place of pleasure.

To sit on stair steps, denotes a gradual rise in fortune and delight.

_Stall_.

To dream of a stall, denotes impossible results from some enterprise
will be expected by you.

_Stallion_.

To dream of a stallion, foretells prosperous conditions are approaching you,
in which you will hold a position which will confer honor upon you.

To dream you ride a fine stallion, denotes you will rise to position
and affluence in a phenomenal way; however, your success will warp
your morality and sense of justice.  To see one with the rabies,
foretells that wealthy surroundings will cause you to assume arrogance,
which will be distasteful to your friends, and your pleasures
will be deceitful.

_Stammer_.

To dream that you stammer in your conversation, denotes that worry
and illness will threaten your enjoyment.  To hear others stammer,
foretells that unfriendly persons will delight in annoying you
and giving you needless worry.

_Standard-bearer_.

To dream that you are a standard-bearer, denotes that your occupation
will be pleasant, but varied.

To see others acting as standard-bearers, foretells that you
will be jealous and envious of some friend.

_Stars_.

To dream of looking upon clear, shining stars, foretells good
health and prosperity.  If they are dull or red, there is trouble
and misfortune ahead.

To see a shooting or falling star, denotes sadness and grief.

To see stars appearing and vanishing mysteriously, there will be some strange
changes and happenings in your near future.

If you dream that a star falls on you, there will be a bereavement
in your family.

To see them rolling around on the earth, is a sign of formidable danger
and trying times.

_Starving_.

To dream of being in a starving condition, portends unfruitful labors
and a dearth of friends.

To see others in this condition, omens misery and dissatisfaction
with present companions and employment.

_Statues_.

To see statues in dreams, signifies estrangement from a loved one.
Lack of energy will cause you disappointment in realizing wishes.

_Stealing_.

To dream of stealing, or of seeing others commit this act,
foretells bad luck and loss of character.

To be accused of stealing, denotes that you will be misunderstood
in some affair, and suffer therefrom, but you will eventually find
that this will bring you favor.

To accuse others, denotes that you will treat some person
with hasty inconsideration.

_Steeple_.

To see a steeple rising from a church, is a harbinger of
sickness and reverses.

A broken one, points to death in your circle, or friends.

To climb a steeple, foretells that you will have serious difficulties,
but will surmount them.

To fall from one, denotes losses in trade and ill health.

_Steps_.[211]

To dream that you ascend steps, denotes that fair prospects
will relieve former anxiety.

To decend them, you may look for misfortune.

To fall down them, you are threatened with unexpected failure
in your affairs.


[211] See Stairs.

_Step-sister_.

To dream of a step-sister, denotes you will have unavoidable care
and annoyance upon you.

_Stethoscope_.

To dream of a stethoscope, foretells calamity to your hopes and enterprises.
There will be troubles and recriminations in love.

_Sticks_.

To dream of sticks, is an unlucky omen.

_Stillborn_.

To dream of a stillborn infant, denotes that some distressing
incident will come before your notice.

_Stilts_.

To dream of walking on stilts, denotes that your fortune is
in an insecure condition.

To fall from them, or feel them break beneath you, you will be precipitated
into embarrassments by trusting your affairs to the care of others.

_Sting_.

To feel that any insect stings you in a dream, is a foreboding
of evil and unhappiness.

For a young woman to dream that she is stung, is ominous of sorrow
and remorse from over-confidence in men.

_Stockings_.[212]

To dream of stockings, denotes that you will derive pleasure
from dissolute companionship.

For a young woman to see her stockings ragged, or worn,
foretells that she will be guilty of unwise, if not immoral conduct.
To dream that she puts on fancy stockings, she will be fond
of the attention of men, and she should be careful to whom she
shows preference.  If white ones appear to be on her feet,
she is threatened with woeful disappointment or illness.


[212] See Knitting.

_Stone_.[213]

To see stones in your dreams, foretells numberless perplexities and failures.

To walk among rocks, or stones, omens that an uneven and rough
pathway will be yours for at least a while.

To make deals in ore-bearing rock lands, you will be
successful in business after many lines have been tried.
If you fail to profit by the deal, you will have disappointments.
If anxiety is greatly felt in closing the trade, you will succeed
in buying or selling something that will prove profitable to you.

Small stones or pebbles, implies that little worries and vexations
will irritate you.

If you throw a stone, you will have cause to admonish a person.

If you design to throw a pebble or stone at some belligerent person,
it denotes that some evil feared by you will pass because of your untiring
attention to right principles.


[213] See Rock.

_Stone Mason_.

To see stone masons at work while dreaming, foretells disappointment.

To dream that you are a stone mason, portends that your labors will
be unfruitful, and your companions will be dull and uncongenial.

_Storage Battery_.

To dream of a storage battery, opportune speculations will return
you handsome gains.

_Store_.

To dream of a store filled with merchandise, foretells
prosperity and advancement.

An empty one, denotes failure of efforts and quarrels.

To dream that your store is burning, is a sign of renewed activity
in business and pleasure.

If you find yourself in a department store, it foretells that much pleasure
will be derived from various sources of profit.

To sell goods in one, your advancement will be accelerated by your energy
and the efforts of friends.

To dream that you sell a pair of soiled, gray cotton gloves to a woman,
foretells that your opinion of women will place you in hazardous positions.
If a woman has this dream, her preference for some one of the male sex
will not be appreciated very much by him.

_Storm_.[214]

To see and hear a storm approaching, foretells continued sickness,
unfavorable business, and separation from friends, which will cause
added distress.  If the storm passes, your affliction will not
be so heavy.


[214] See Hurricane and Rain.

_Straw_.

If you dream of straw, your life is threatened with emptiness and failure.

To see straw piles burning, is a signal of prosperous times.

To feed straw to stock, foretells that you will make poor provisions
for those depending upon you.

_Strawberries_.

To dream of strawberries, is favorable to advancement and pleasure.
You will obtain some long wished-for object.

To eat them, denotes requited love.

To deal in them, denotes abundant harvest and happiness.

_Street_.

To dream that you are walking in a street, foretells ill luck and worries.
You will almost despair of reaching the goal you have set up
in your aspirations.

To be in a familiar street in a distant city, and it appears dark,
you will make a journey soon, which will not afford the profit
or pleasure contemplated.  If the street is brilliantly lighted,
you will engage in pleasure, which will quickly pass,
leaving no comfort.

To pass down a street and feel alarmed lest a thug attack you,
denotes that you are venturing upon dangerous ground in advancing
your pleasure or business.

_Street-poster_.

To dream that you are a street-poster, denotes that you will undertake
some unpleasant and unprofitable work.

To see street-posters at work, foretells disagreeable news.

_Struggling_.

To dream of struggling, foretells that you will encounter
serious difficulties, but if you gain the victory in your struggle,
you will also surmount present obstacles.

_Stumble_.

If you stumble in a dream while walking or running, you will meet
with disfavor, and obstructions will bar your path to success,
but you will eventually surmount them, if you do not fall.

_Stumps_.

To dream of a stump, foretells you are to have reverses and will depart
from your usual mode of living.  To see fields of stumps, signifies you
will be unable to defend yourself from the encroachments of adversity.
To dig or pull them up, is a sign that you will extricate yourself from
the environment of poverty by throwing off sentiment and pride and meeting
the realities of life with a determination to overcome whatever opposition
you may meet.

_Suckle_.[215]

To see the young taking suckle, denotes contentment and favorable
conditions for success is unfolding to you.


[215] See Nursing.

_Suffocating_.[216]

To dream that you are suffocating, denotes that you will experience
deep sorrow and mortification at the conduct of some one you love.
You should be careful of your health after this dream.


[216] See Smoke.

_Sugar_.

To dream of sugar, denotes that you will be hard to please
in your domestic life, and will entertain jealousy while
seeing no cause for aught but satisfaction and secure joys.
There may be worries, and your strength and temper taxed
after this dream.

To eat sugar in your dreams, you will have unpleasant matters to contend
with for a while, but they will result better than expected.

To price sugar, denotes that you are menaced by enemies.

To deal in sugar and see large quantities of it being delivered to you,
you will barely escape a serious loss.

To see a cask of sugar burst and the sugar spilling out,
foretells a slight loss.

To hear a negro singing while unloading sugar, some seemingly insignificant
affair will bring you great benefit, either in business or social states.

_Sugar-tongs_.

To dream of sugar-tongs, foretells that disagreeable tidings
of wrong-doings will be received by you.

_Suicide_.

To commit suicide in a dream, foretells that misfortune will hang
heavily over you.

To see or hear others committing this deed, foretells that the failure
of others will affect your interests.

For a young woman to dream that her lover commits suicide, her disappointment
by the faithlessness of her lover is accentuated.

_Sulphur_.

To dream of sulphur, warns you to use much discretion in your dealings,
as you are threatened with foul play.

To see sulphur burning, is ominous of great care attendant upon your wealth.

To eat sulphur, indicates good health and consequent pleasure.

_Sun_.

To dream of seeing a clear, shining sunrise, foretells joyous
events and prosperity, which give delightful promises.

To see the sun at noontide, denotes the maturity of ambitions
and signals unbounded satisfaction.

To see the sunset, is prognostic of joys and wealth passing their zenith,
and warns you to care for your interests with renewed vigilance.

A sun shining through clouds, denotes that troubles and difficulties
are losing hold on you, and prosperity is nearing you.

If the sun appears weird, or in an eclipse, there will be stormy
and dangerous times, but these will eventually pass, leaving your
business and domestic affairs in better forms than before.

_Sunshade_.

To dream of seeing young girls carrying sunshades, foretells prosperity
and exquisite delights.

A broken one, foretells sickness and death to the young.

_Surgeon_.

To dream of a surgeon, denotes you are threatened by enemies who are close
to you in business.  For a young woman, this dream promises a serious illness
from which she will experience great inconvenience.

_Surgical Instruments_.

To see surgical instruments in a dream, foretells dissatisfaction will be felt
by you at the indiscreet manner a friend manifests toward you.

_Swallow_.

To dream of swallows, is a sign of peace and domestic harmony.

To see a wounded or dead one, signifies unavoidable sadness.

_Swamp_.[217]

To walk through swampy places in dreams, foretells that you will be
the object of adverse circumstances.  Your inheritance will be uncertain,
and you will undergo keen disappointments in your love matters.

To go through a swamp where you see clear water and green growths,
you will take hold on prosperity and singular pleasures, the obtaining
of which will be attended with danger and intriguing.


[217] See Marsh.

_Swan_.

To dream of seeing white swans floating upon placid waters,
foretells prosperous outlooks and delightful experiences.

To see a black swan, denotes illicit pleasure, if near clear water.

A dead swan, foretells satiety and discontentment

To see them flying, pleasant anticipations will be realized soon.

_Swearing_.

To dream of swearing, denotes some unpleasant obstructions in business.
A lover will have cause to suspect the faithfulness of his affianced
after this dream.

To dream that you are swearing before your family, denotes that disagreements
will soon be brought about by your unloyal conduct.

_Sweeping_.

To dream of sweeping, denotes that you will gain favor in the eyes
of your husband, and children will find pleasure in the home.

If you think the floors need sweeping, and you from some cause
neglect them, there will be distresses and bitter disappointments
awaiting you in the approaching days.

To servants, sweeping is a sign of disagreements and suspicion
of the intentions of others.

_Sweetheart_.[218]

To dream that your sweetheart is affable and of pleasing physique,
foretells that you will woo a woman who will prove a joy to your pride
and will bring you a good inheritance.  If she appears otherwise, you will
be discontented with your choice before the marriage vows are consummated.
To dream of her as being sick or in distress, denotes that sadness will
be intermixed with joy.

If you dream that your sweetheart is a corpse, you will have a long
period of doubt and unfavorable fortune.


[218] See Lover, Hugging, and Kissing.

_Sweet Oil_.

Sweet oil in dreams, implies considerate treatment will be withheld
from you in some unfortunate occurrence.

_Sweet Taste_.

To dream of any kind of a sweet taste in your mouth, denotes you
will be praised for your pleasing conversation and calm demeanor
in a time of commotion and distress.

To dream that you are trying to get rid of a sweet taste,
foretells that you will oppress and deride your friends,
and will incur their displeasure.

_Swelling_.

To dream that you see yourself swollen, denotes that you will amass fortune,
but your egotism will interfere with your enjoyment.

To see others swollen, foretells that advancement will meet
with envious obstructions.

Swimming.[219]

To dream of swimming, is an augury of success if you find
no discomfort in the act.  If you feel yourself going down,
much dissatisfaction will present itself to you.

For a young woman to dream that she is swimming with a girl friend
who is an artist in swimming, foretells that she will be loved
for her charming disposition, and her little love affairs will be
condoned by her friends.

To swim under water, foretells struggles and anxieties.


[219] See Diving and Bathing.

_Swiss Cheese_.

To dream of Swiss cheese, foretells that you will come into possession
of substantial property, and healthful amusements will be enjoyed.

_Switch_.

To dream of a switch, foretells changes and misfortune.

A broken switch, foretells disgrace and trouble.

To dream of a railroad switch, denotes that travel will cause
you much loss and inconvenience.

To dream of a switch, signifies you will meet discouragements
in momentous affairs.

_Sword_.

To dream that you wear a sword, indicates that you will fill
some public position with honor.

To have your sword taken from you, denotes your vanquishment in rivalry.

To see others bearing swords, foretells that altercations will be
attended with danger.

A broken sword, foretells despair.

_Sybil_.

To dream of a sybil, foretells that you will enjoy assignations
and other demoralizing pleasures.

_Symphony_.[220]

To dream of symphonies, heralds delightful occupations.


[220] See Music.

_Synagogue_.[221]

To dream of a synagogue, foretells that you have enemies
powerfully barricading your entrance into fortune's realms.
If you climb to the top on the outside, you will overcome
oppositions and be successful.

If you read the Hebrew inscription on a synagogue, you will meet disaster,
but will eventually rebuild your fortunes with renewed splendor.


[221] See Church.

_Syringe_.

To dream of a syringe, denotes that false alarm of the gravity
of a relative's condition will reach you.  To see a broken one,
foretells you are approaching a period of ill health or worry
over slight mistakes in business.



T.


``_And it was so, when Gideon heard the telling of the dream,
and the interpretation thereof, that he worshiped,
and returned into the host of Israel, and said, `Arise; for
the Lord hath delivered into your hand the host of Midian_.'
''--Judges VII., 15.

_Table_.

To dream of setting a table preparatory to a meal, foretells happy unions
and prosperous circumstances.

To see empty tables, signifies poverty or disagreements.

To clear away the table, denotes that pleasure will soon assume
the form of trouble and indifference.

To eat from a table without a cloth, foretells that you will be possessed
of an independent disposition, and the prosperity or conduct of others
will give you no concern.

To see a table walking or moving in some mysterious way,
foretells that dissatisfaction will soon enter your life,
and you will seek relief in change.

To dream of a soiled cloth on a table, denotes disobedience from servants
or children, and quarreling will invariably follow pleasure.

To see a broken table, is ominous of decaying fortune.

To see one standing or sitting on a table, foretells that to obtain
their desires they will be guilty of indiscretions.

To see or hear table-rapping or writing, denotes that you will undergo change
of feelings towards your friends, and your fortune will be threatened.
A loss from the depreciation of relatives or friends is indicated.

_Tacks_.

To dream of tacks, means to you many vacations and quarrels.

For a woman to drive one, foretells she will master unpleasant rivalry.

If she mashes her finger while driving it, she will be distressed
over unpleasant tasks

_Tadpole_.

To dream of tadpoles, foretells uncertain speculation will bring cause
for uneasiness in business.  For a young woman to see them in clear water,
foretells she will form a relation with a wealthy but immoral man.

_Tail_.

To dream of seeing only the tail of a beast, unusual annoyance is indicated
where pleasures seemed assured.

To cut off the tail of an animal, denotes that you will suffer misfortune
by your own carelessness.

To dream that you have the tail of a beast grown on you,
denotes that your evil ways will cause you untold distress,
and strange events will cause you perplexity.

_Tailor_.

To dream of a tailor, denotes that worries will arise on account
of some journey to be made.

To have a misunderstanding with one, shows that you will be disappointed
in the outcome of some scheme.

For one to take your measure, denotes that you will have
quarrels and disagreements.

_Talisman_.

To dream that you wear a talisman, implies you will have
pleasant companions and enjoy favors from the rich.
For a young woman to dream her lover gives her one, denotes she
will obtain her wishes concerning marriage.

_Talking_.

To dream of talking, denotes that you will soon hear of the sickness
of relatives, and there will be worries in your affairs.

To hear others talking loudly, foretells that you will be accused
of interfering in the affairs of others.  To think they are talking
about you, denotes that you are menaced with illness and disfavor.

_Tallow_.

To dream of tallow, forebodes that your possessions of love and wealth
will quickly vanish.

_Tambourine_.

To dream of a tambourine, signifies you will have enjoyment in some unusual
event which will soon take place.

_Tank_.

To dream of a tank, foretells you will be prosperous and satisfied beyond
your expectations.  To see a leaking tank, denotes loss in your affairs.

_Tannery_.

To dream of a tannery, denotes contagion and other illness.
Loss in trade is portended.

To dream that you are a tanner, denotes that you will have to engage in work
which is not to your taste, but there will be others dependent upon you.

To buy leather from a tannery, foretells that you will be successful
in your undertakings, but will not make many friends.

_Tape_.

To dream of tape, denotes your work will be wearisome and unprofitable.
For a woman to buy it, foretells she will find misfortune laying
oppression upon her.

_Tapestry_.

To dream of seeing rich tapestry, foretells that luxurious living
will be to your liking, and if the tapestries are not worn or ragged,
you will be able to gratify your inclinations.

If a young woman dreams that her rooms are hung with tapestry,
she will soon wed some one who is rich and above her in standing.

_Tapeworm_.

To dream you see a tapeworm, or have one, denotes disagreeable
prospects for health or for pleasure.

_Tar_.

If you see tar in dreams, it warns you against pitfalls and designs
of treacherous enemies.

To have tar on your hands or clothing, denotes sickness and grief.

_Tarantula_.

To see a tarantula in your dream, signifies enemies are about to overwhelm you
with loss.  To kill one, denotes you will be successful after much ill-luck.

_Target_.

To dream of a target, foretells you will have some affair
demanding your attention from other more pleasant ones.
For a young woman to think she is a target, denotes her reputation
is in danger through the envy of friendly associates.

_Tassels_.

To see tassels in a dream, denotes you will reach the height
of your desires and ambition.  For a young woman to lose them,
denotes she will undergo some unpleasant experience.

_Tattoo_.

To see your body appearing tattooed, foretells that some difficulty
will cause you to make a long and tedious absence from your home.

To see tattooes on others, foretells that strange loves will make
you an object of jealousy.

To dream you are a tattooist, is a sign that you will estrange yourself
from friends because of your fancy for some strange experience.

_Taxes_.

To dream that you pay your taxes, foretells you will
succeed in destroying evil influences rising around you.
If others pay them, you will be forced to ask aid of friends.
If you are unable to pay them, you will be unfortunate in
experiments you are making.

_Tea_.

To dream that you are brewing tea, foretells that you will be guilty
of indiscreet actions, and will feel deeply remorseful.

To see your friends drinking tea, and you with them, denotes that social
pleasures will pall on you, and you will seek to change your feelings
by serving others in their sorrows.

To see dregs in your tea, warns you of trouble in love,
and affairs of a social nature.

To spill tea, is a sign of domestic confusion and grief.

To find your tea chest empty, unfolds much disagreeable gossip and news.

To dream that you are thirsty for tea, denotes that you will be surprised
with uninvited guests.

_Teacups_.

To dream of teacups, foretells that affairs of enjoyment will be
attended by you.  For a woman to break or see them broken, omens her
pleasure and good fortune will be marred by a sudden trouble.
To drink wine from one, foretells fortune and pleasure will be
combined in the near future.

_Teakettle_.

To dream you see a teakettle, implies sudden news which will be likely
to distress you.  For a woman to pour sparkling, cold water from a teakettle,
she will have unexpected favor shown her.

_Tears_.

To dream that you are in tears, denotes that some affliction
will soon envelope you.

To see others shedding tears, foretells that your sorrows will affect
the happiness of others,

_Teasing_.

To find yourself teasing any person while dreaming, denotes that you will
be loved and sought after because of your cheerful and amiable manners.
Your business will be eventually successful.

To dream of being teased, denotes that you will win the love of merry
and well-to-do persons.

For a young woman to dream of being teased, foretells that she will
form a hasty attachment, but will not be successful in consummating
an early marriage.

_Teeth_.

An ordinary dream of teeth augurs an unpleasant contact with sickness,
or disquieting people.

If you dream that your teeth are loose, there will be failures
and gloomy tidings.

If the doctor pulls your tooth, you will have desperate illness, if not fatal;
it will be lingering.

To have them filled, you will recover lost valuables after much uneasiness.

To clean or wash your teeth, foretells that some great struggle
will be demanded of you in order to preserve your fortune.

To dream that you are having a set of teeth made, denotes that severe
crosses will fall upon you, and you will strive to throw them aside.

If you lose your teeth, you will have burdens which will crush your pride
and demolish your affairs.

To dream that you have your teeth knocked out, denotes sudden misfortune.
Either your business will suffer, or deaths or accidents will come
close to you.

To examine your teeth, warns you to be careful of your affairs,
as enemies are lurking near you.

If they appear decayed and snaggled, your business or health
will suffer from intense strains.

To dream of spitting out teeth, portends personal sickness,
or sickness in your immediate family.

Imperfect teeth is one of the worst dreams.  It is full of mishaps
for the dreamer.  A loss of estates, failure of persons to carry
out their plans and desires, bad health, depressed conditions
of the nervous system for even healthy persons.

For one tooth to fall out, foretells disagreeable news; if two,
it denotes unhappy states that the dreamer will be plunged
into from no carelessness on his part.  If three fall out,
sickness and accidents of a very serious nature will follow.

Back to Full Books