10,000 Dreams Interpreted [Or. . ."What's In A Dream"] [Or. . .Dreams, Their Scientific and Practical Interpretations]

For one to dream that she discards the robes of her order,
foretells that longing for worldly pleasures will unfit her
for her chosen duties.

_Nuptial_.[139]

For a woman to dream of her nuptials, she will soon enter upon
new engagements, which will afford her distinction, pleasure, and harmony.


[139] See Marriage.

_Nurse_.

To dream that a nurse is retained in your home, foretells distressing illness,
or unlucky visiting among friends.

To see a nurse leaving your house, omens good health in the family.

For a young woman to dream that she is a nurse, denotes that she will gain
the esteem of people, through her self-sacrifice. If she parts from a patient,
she will yield to the persuasion of deceit.

_Nursing_.

For a woman to dream of nursing her baby, denotes pleasant employment.

For a young woman to dream of nursing a baby, foretells that she
will occupy positions of honor and trust.

For a man to dream of seeing his wife nurse their baby,
denotes harmony in his pursuits.

_Nuts_.

To dream of gathering nuts, augurs successful enterprises,
and much favor in love.

To eat them, prosperity will aid you in grasping any desired pleasure.

For a woman to dream of nuts, foretells that her fortune will
be on blissful heights.

_Nutmegs_.

To dream of nutmegs, is a sign of prosperity, and pleasant journeyings.

_Nymph_.

To see nymphs bathing in clear water, denotes that passionate desires will
find an ecstatic realization.  Convivial entertainments will enchant you.

To see them out of their sphere, denotes disappointment with the world.

For a young woman to see them bathing, denotes that she will have great
favor and pleasure, but they will not rest strictly within the moral code.
To dream that she impersonates a nymph, is a sign that she is using her
attractions for selfish purposes, and thus the undoing of men.



O.

``_And it shall come to pass afterward, that I will pour out my spirit
upon all flesh; and your sons and your daughters shall prophesy,
your old men shall dream dreams, your young men shall see visions_.''--
Joel ii., 28

_Oak_.

To dream of seeing a forest of oaks, signifies great prosperity
in all conditions of life.

To see an oak full of acorns, denotes increase and promotion.

If blasted oak, it denotes sudden and shocking surprises.

For sweethearts to dream of oaks, denotes that they will soon
begin life together under favorable circumstances.

_Oar_.

To dream of handling oars, portends disappointments for you, inasmuch as you
will sacrifice your own pleasure for the comfort of others.

To lose an oar, denotes vain efforts to carry out designs satisfactorily.

A broken oar represents interruption in some anticipated pleasure.

_Oath_.

Whenever you take an oath in your dreams, prepare for dissension
and altercations on waking.

_Oatmeal_.

To dream of eating oatmeal, signifies the enjoyment of
worthily earned fortune.

For a young woman to dream of preparing it for the table,
denotes that she will soon preside over the destiny of others.

_Oats_.

To dream that oats hold the vision, portends a variety of good things.
The farmer will especially advance in fortune and domestic harmony.

To see decayed oats, foretells that sorrow will displace bright hopes.

_Obedience_.

To dream that you render obedience to another, foretells for you
a common place, a pleasant but uneventful period of life.

If others are obedient to you, it shows that you will command
fortune and high esteem.

_Obelisk_.

An obelisk looming up stately and cold in your dreams is the forerunner
of melancholy tidings.

For lovers to stand at the base of an obelisk, denotes fatal disagreements.

_Obituary_.

To dream of writing an obituary, denotes that unpleasant and discordant
duties will devolve upon you.

If you read one, news of a distracting nature will soon reach you.

_Obligation_.

To dream of obligating yourself in any incident, denotes that you
will be fretted and worried by the thoughtless complaints of others.

If others obligate themselves to you, it portends that you will win
the regard of acquaintances and friends.

_Observatory_.

To dream of viewing the heavens and beautiful landscapes from an observatory,
denotes your swift elevation to prominent positions and places of trust.
For a young woman this dream signals the realization of the highest
earthly joys.  If the heavens are clouded, your highest aims
will miss materialization.

_Occultist_.

To dream that you listen to the teachings of an occultist, denotes that you
will strive to elevate others to a higher plane of justice and forbearance.
If you accept his views, you will find honest delight by keeping your mind
and person above material frivolities and pleasures.

_Ocean_.

To dream of the ocean when it is calm is propitious.
The sailor will have a pleasant and profitable voyage.
The business man will enjoy a season of remuneration,
and the young man will revel in his sweetheart's charms.

To be far out on the ocean, and hear the waves lash the ship,
forebodes disaster in business life, and quarrels and stormy
periods in the household.

To be on shore and see the waves of the ocean foaming against each other,
foretells your narrow escape from injury and the designs of enemies.

To dream of seeing the ocean so shallow as to allow wading,
or a view of the bottom, signifies prosperity and pleasure
with a commingling of sorrow and hardships.

To sail on the ocean when it is calm, is always propitious.

_October_.

To imagine you are in October is ominous of gratifying success
in your undertakings.  You will also make new acquaintances
which will ripen into lasting friendships.

_Oculist_.

To dream of consulting an oculist, denotes that you will be dissatisfied
with your progress in life, and will use artificial means of advancement.

_Odd-Fellow_.

To dream of this order, signifies that you will have sincere friends,
and misfortune will touch you but lightly.

To join this order, foretells that you will win distinction
and conjugal bliss.

_Odor_.

To dream of inhaling sweet odors, is a sign of a beautiful woman
ministering to your daily life, and successful financiering.

To smell disgusting odors, foretells unpleasant disagreements
and unreliable servants.

_Offense_.

To dream of being offended, denotes that errors will be detected
in your conduct, which will cause you inward rage while attempting
to justify yourself.

To give offense, predicts for you many struggles before reaching your aims.

For a young woman to give, or take offense, signifies that she will regret
hasty conclusions, and disobedience to parents or guardian.

_Offering_.

To bring or make an offering, foretells that you will be cringing
and hypocritical unless you cultivate higher views of duty.

_Office_.

For a person to dream that he holds office, denotes that his
aspirations will sometimes make him undertake dangerous paths,
but his boldness will be rewarded with success.  If he fails
by any means to secure a desired office he will suffer keen
disappointment in his affairs.

To dream that you are turned out of office, signifies loss of valuables.

_Offspring_.

To dream of your own offspring, denotes cheerfulness and the merry voices
of neighbors and children.

To see the offspring of domestic animals, denotes increase in prosperity.

_Oil_.

To dream of anointing with oil, foretells events in which you
will be the particular moving power.

Quantities of oil, prognosticates excesses in pleasurable enterprises.

For a man to dream that he deals in oil, denotes unsuccessful love making,
as he will expect unusual concessions.

For a woman to dream that she is anointed with oil, shows that she
will be open to indiscreet advances.

_Oilcloth_.

To dream of oilcloth is a warning that you will meet coldness and treachery.

To deal in it, denotes uncertain speculations.

_Ointment_.

To dream of ointment, denotes that you will form friendships
which will prove beneficial and pleasing to you.

For a young woman to dream that she makes ointment, denotes that she
will be able to command her own affairs whether they be of a private
or public character.

_Old Man, or Woman_.[140]

To dream of seeing an old man, or woman, denotes that unhappy cares
will oppress you, if they appear otherwise than serene.


[140] See Faces, Men, and Women.

_Olives_.

Gathering olives with a merry band of friends, foretells favorable
results in business, and delightful surprises.

If you take them from bottles, it foretells conviviality

To break a bottle of olives, indicates disappointments on the eve of pleasure.

To eat them, signifies contentment and faithful friends.

_Omelet_.

To see omelet being served in your dream, warns you of flattery and deceit,
which is about to be used against you.

To eat it, shows that you will be imposed upon by some one seemingly worthy
of your confidence.

_Omnibus_.[141]

To dream that you are being drawn through the streets in an omnibus,
foretells misunderstandings with friends, and unwise promises will be
made by you.


[141] See Carriage.

_One-Eyed_.

To see one-eyed creatures in your dreams, is portentous of an over-whelming
intimation of secret intriguing against your fortune and happiness.

_Onions_.

Seeing quantities of onions in your dreams, represents the amount
of spite and envy that you will meet, by being successful.

If you eat them, you will overcome all opposition.

If you see them growing, there will be just enough of rivalry in your affairs,
to make things interesting.

Cooked onions, denote placidity and small gains in business.

To dream that you are cutting onions and feel the escaping juice in your eyes,
denotes that you will be defeated by your rivals.

_Opera_.

To dream of attending an opera, denotes that you will be entertained by
congenial friends, and find that your immediate affairs will be favorable.

_Opium_.

To dream of opium, signifies strangers will obstruct your chances
of improving your fortune, by sly and seductive means.

_Opulence_.[142]

For a young woman to dream that she lives in fairy like opulence,
denotes that she will be deceived, and will live for a time in luxurious
ease and splendor, to find later that she is mated with shame and poverty.
When young women dream that they are enjoying solid and real wealth
and comforts, they will always wake to find some real pleasure,
but when abnormal or fairy-like dreams of luxury and joy seem to
encompass them, their waking moments will be filled with disappointments;
as the dreams are warnings, superinduced by their practicality being
supplanted by their excitable imagination and lazy desires, which should
be overcome with energy, and the replacing of practicality on her base.
No young woman should fill her mind with idle day dreams,
but energetically strive to carry forward noble ideals and thoughts,
and promising and helpful dreams will come to her while she restores
physical energies in sleep.


[142] See Wealth.

_Oranges_.

Seeing a number of orange trees in a healthy condition, bearing ripe fruit,
is a sign of health and prosperous surroundings.

To eat oranges is signally bad.  Sickness of friends or relatives
will be a source of worry to you.  Dissatisfaction will pervade
the atmosphere in business circles.  If they are fine and
well-flavored, there will be a slight abatement of ill luck.
A young woman is likely to lose her lover, if she dreams of
eating oranges.  If she dreams of seeing a fine one pitched up high,
she will be discreet in choosing a husband from many lovers.

To slip on an orange peel, foretells the death of a relative.

To buy oranges at your wife's solicitation, and she eats them, denotes that
unpleasant complications will resolve themselves into profit.

_Orang-utang_.

To dream of an orang-utang, denotes that some person is
falsely using your influence to further selfish schemes.
For a young woman, it portends an unfaithful lover.

_Orator_.

Being under the spell of an orator's eloquence, denotes that
you will heed the voice of flattery to your own detriment,
as you will be persuaded into offering aid to unworthy people.

If a young woman falls in love with an orator, it is proof that in her loves
she will be affected by outward show.

_Orchard_.

Dreaming of passing through leaving and blossoming orchards
with your sweetheart, omens a delightful consummation of a
long courtship.  If the orchard is filled with ripening fruit,
it denotes recompense for faithful service to those under masters,
and full fruition of designs for the leaders of enterprises.
Happy homes, with loyal husbands and obedient children, for wives.

If you are in an orchard and see hogs eating the fallen fruit,
it is a sign that you will lose property in trying to claim
what are not really your own belongings.

To gather the ripe fruit, is a happy omen of plenty to all classes.

Orchards infested with blight, denotes a miserable existence,
amid joy and wealth.

To be caught in brambles, while passing through an orchard,
warns you of a jealous rival, or, if married, a private but large
row with your partner.

If you dream of seeing a barren orchard, opportunities to rise
to higher stations in life will be ignored.

If you see one robbed of its verdure by seeming winter, it denotes that you
have been careless of the future in the enjoyment of the present.

To see a storm-swept orchard, brings an unwelcome guest, or duties.

_Orchestra_.

Belonging to an orchestra and playing, foretells pleasant entertainments,
and your sweetheart will be faithful and cultivated.

To hear the music of an orchestra, denotes that the knowledge
of humanity will at all times prove you to be a much-liked person,
and favors will fall unstintedly upon you.

_Organ_.

To hear the pealing forth of an organ in grand anthems,
signifies lasting friendships and well-grounded fortune.

To see an organ in a church, denotes despairing separation of families,
and death, perhaps, for some of them.

If you dream of rendering harmonious music on an organ,
you will be fortunate in the way to worldly comfort, and much
social distinction will be given you.

To hear doleful singing and organ accompaniment, denotes you are nearing
a wearisome task, and probable loss of friends or position.

_Organist_.

To see an organist in your dreams, denotes a friend will cause you much
inconvenience from hasty action.  For a young woman to dream that she
is an organist, foretells she will be so exacting in her love that she
will be threatened with desertion.

_Ornament_.

If you wear ornaments in dreams, you will have a flattering honor
conferred upon you.

If you receive them, you will be fortunate in undertakings.

Giving them away, denotes recklessness and lavish extravagance.

Losing an ornament, brings the loss either of a lover, or a good situation.

_Orphan_.

Condoling with orphans in a dream, means that the unhappy cares
of others will touch your sympathies and cause you to sacrifice
much personal enjoyment.

If the orphans be related to you, new duties will come into your life,
causing estrangement from friends ant from some person held above
mere friendly liking.

_Ostrich_.

To dream of an ostrich, denotes that you will secretly amass wealth,
but at the same time maintain degrading intrigues with women.

To catch one, your resources will enable you to enjoy travel
and extensive knowledge.

_Otter_.

To see otters diving and sporting in limpid streams is certain
to bring the dreamer waking happiness and good fortune.
You will find ideal enjoyment in an early marriage, if you
are single; wives may expect unusual tenderness from their
spouses after this dream.

_Ottoman_.[143]

Dreams in which you find yourself luxuriously reposing upon an ottoman,
discussing the intricacies of love with your sweetheart, foretells that
envious rivals will seek to defame you in the eyes of your affianced,
and a hasty marriage will be advised.


[143] See Couch.

_Ouija_.

To dream of working on an ouija board, foretells the miscarriage of plans
and unlucky partnerships.

To fail to work, one is ominous of complications, caused by substituting
pleasure for business.

If it writes fluently, you may expect fortunate results from
some well-planned enterprise.

If a negro steals it, you will meet with trials and vexations past endurance.
To recover it, foretells that grievances will meet a favorable adjustment.

_Oven_.

For a woman to dream that her baking oven is red hot, denotes that she will
be loved by her own family and friends, for her sweet and unselfish nature.
If she is baking, temporary disappointments await her.  If the oven is broken,
she will undergo many vexations from children and servants.

_Overcoat_.

To dream of an overcoat, denotes you will suffer from contrariness,
exhibited by others.  To borrow one, foretells you will be unfortunate
through mistakes made by strangers.  If you see or are wearing a handsome
new overcoat, you will be exceedingly fortunate in realizing your wishes.

_Over-alls_.

For a woman to dream that she sees a man wearing over-alls,
she will be deceived as to the real character of her lover.
If a wife, she will be deceived in her husband's frequent absence,
and the real cause will create suspicions of his fidelity.

_Owl_.

To hear the solemn, unearthly sound of the muffled voice of the owl,
warns dreamers that death creeps closely in the wake of health and joy.
Precaution should be taken that life is not ruthlessly exposed to his
unyielding grasp.  Bad tidings of the absent will surely follow this dream.

To see a dead owl, denotes a narrow escape from desperate illness or death.

To see an owl, foretells that you will be secretly maligned
and be in danger from enemies.

_Ox_.[144]

To see a well-fed ox, signifies that you will become a leading person
in your community, and receive much adulation from women.

To see fat oxen in green pastures, signifies fortune,
and your rise to positions beyond your expectations.
If they are lean, your fortune will dwindle, and your friends
will fall away from you.

If you see oxen well-matched and yoked, it betokens a happy and
wealthy marriage, or that you are already joined to your true mate.

To see a dead ox, is a sign of bereavement.

If they are drinking from a clear pond, or stream, you will possess
some long-desired estate, perhaps it will be in the form of a lovely
and devoted woman.  If a woman she will win the embraces of her lover.


[144] See Cattle.

_Oysters_.

If you dream that you eat oysters, it denotes that you will lose
all sense of propriety and morality in your pursuit of low pleasures,
and the indulgence of an insatiate thirst for gaining.

To deal in oysters, denotes that you will not be over-modest in your mode
of winning a sweetheart, or a fortune.

To see them, denotes easy circumstances, and many children are promised you.

_Oyster Shells_.

To see oyster shells in your dreams, denotes that you will be frustrated
in your attempt to secure the fortune of another.



P.

``_And the King said unto them, I have dreamed a dream,
and my spirit was troubled to know the dream_.''--Dan.  ii., 3.

_Pacify_.

To endeavor to pacify suffering ones, denotes that you will be
loved for your sweetness of disposition.  To a young woman,
this dream is one of promise of a devoted husband or friends.

Pacifying the anger of others, denotes that you will labor
for the advancement of others.

If a lover dreams of soothing the jealous suspicions of his sweetheart,
he will find that his love will be unfortunately placed.

_Packet_.

To dream of seeing a packet coming in, foretells that some pleasant
recreation is in store for you.

To see one going out, you will experience slight losses and disappointments.

_Page_.

To see a page, denotes that you will contract a hasty union with one unsuited
to you.  You will fail to control your romantic impulses.

If a young woman dreams she acts as a page, it denotes that she
is likely to participate in some foolish escapade.

_Pagoda_.

To see a pagoda in your dreams, denotes that you will soon go
on a long desired journey.

If a young woman finds herself in a pagoda with her sweetheart,
many unforeseen events will transpire before her union is legalized.
An empty one, warns her of separation from her lover.

_Pail_.

To dream of full pails of milk, is a sign of fair prospects
and pleasant associations.

An empty pail is a sign of famine, or bad crops.

For a young woman to be carrying a pail, denotes household employment.

_Pain_.

To dream that you are in pain, will make sure of your own unhappiness.
This dream foretells useless regrets over some trivial transaction.

To see others in pain, warns you that you are making mistakes
in your life.

_Paint and Painting_.

To see newly painted houses in dreams, foretells that you will succeed
with some devised plan.

To have paint on your clothing, you will be made unhappy by the thoughtless
criticisms of others.

To dream that you use the brush yourself, denotes that you
will be well pleased with your present occupation.

To dream of seeing beautiful paintings, denotes that friends will assume
false positions towards you, and you will find that pleasure is illusive.

For a young woman to dream of painting a picture, she will be deceived
in her lover, as he will transfer his love to another.

_Palace_.[145]

Wandering through a palace and noting its grandeur, signifies that your
prospects are growing brighter and you will assume new dignity.

To see and hear fine ladies and men dancing and conversing, denotes that you
will engage in profitable and pleasing associations.

For a young woman of moderate means to dream that she is a
participant in the entertainment, and of equal social standing
with others, is a sign of her advancement through marriage,
or the generosity of relatives.

This is often a very deceitful and misleading dream to the young
woman of humble circumstances; as it is generally induced in such
cases by the unhealthy day dreams of her idle, empty brain.
She should strive after this dream, to live by honest work,
and restrain deceitful ambition by observing the fireside counsels
of mother, and friends.


[145] See Opulence.

_Palisade_.

To dream of the palisades, denotes that you will alter well-formed plans
to please strangers, and by so doing, you will impair your own interests.

_Pall_.

To dream that you see a pall, denotes that you will have
sorrow and misfortune.

If you raise the pall from a corpse, you will doubtless soon
mourn the death of one whom you love.

_Pall-bearer_.

To dream of a pall-bearer, indicates some enemy will provoke
your ill feeling, by constant attacks on your integrity.
If you see a pall-bearer, you will antagonize worthy institutions,
and make yourself obnoxious to friends.

_Pallet_.

To dream of a pallet, denotes that you will suffer temporary
uneasiness over your love affairs.  For a young woman,
it is a sign of a jealous rival.

_Palmistry_.

For a young woman to dream of palmistry, foretells she will be
the object of suspicion.

If she has her palms read, she will have many friends
of the opposite sex, but her own sex will condemn her.
If she reads others' hands, she will gain distinction by her
intelligent bearing.  If a minister's hand, she will need friends,
even in her elevation.

_Palm Tree_.

Palm trees seen in your dreams, are messages of hopeful situations
and happiness of a high order.

For a young woman to pass down an avenue of palms, omens a
cheerful home and a faithful husband.  If the palms are withered,
some unexpected sorrowful event will disturb her serenity.

_Palsy_.

To dream that you are afflicted with palsy, denotes that you
are making unstable contracts.

To see your friend so afflicted, there will be uncertainty
as to his faithfulness and sickness, too, may enter your home.

For lovers to dream that their sweethearts have palsy, signifies that
dissatisfaction over some question will mar their happiness.

_Pancake_.

To dream of eating pancakes, denotes that you will have excellent
success in all enterprises undertaken at this time.

To cook them, denotes that you will be economical and thrifty
in your home.

_Pane of Glass_.

To dream that you handle a pane of glass, denotes that you are dealing
in uncertainties.  If you break it, your failure will be accentuated.

To talk to a person through a pane of glass, denotes that there
are obstacles in your immediate future, and they will cause you
no slight inconvenience.

_Panorama_.

To dream of a panorama, denotes that you will change your
occupation or residence.  You should curb your inclinations
for change of scene and friends.

_Panther_.

To see a panther and experience fright, denotes that contracts in love
or business may be canceled unexpectedly, owing to adverse influences
working against your honor.  But killing, or over-powering it,
you will experience joy and be successful in your undertakings.
Your surroundings will take on fair prospects.

If one menaces you by its presence, you will have disappointments
in business.  Other people will likely recede from their promises to you.

If you hear the voice of a panther, and experience terror
or fright, you will have unfavorable news, coming in the way
of reducing profit or gain, and you may have social discord;
no fright forebodes less evil.

A panther, like the cat, seen in a dream, portends evil to the dreamer,
unless he kills it.

_Pantomime_.

To dream of seeing pantomimes, denotes that your friends will deceive you.
If you participate in them, you will have cause of offense.
Affairs will not prove satisfactory.

_Paper or parchment_.

If you have occasion in your dreams to refer to, or handle,
any paper or parchment, you will be threatened with losses.
They are likely to be in the nature of a lawsuit.
For a young woman, it means that she will be angry with her
lover and that she fears the opinion of acquaintances.
Beware, if you are married, of disagreements in the precincts
of the home.

_Parables_.

To dream of parables, denotes that you will be undecided as to the best
course to pursue in dissenting to some business complication.  To the lover,
or young woman, this is a prophecy of misunderstandings and disloyalty.

_Paradise_.

To dream that you are in Paradise, means loyal friends, who are
willing to aid you.  This dream holds out bright hopes to sailors
or those about to make a long voyage.  To mothers, this means
fair and obedient children.  If you are sick and unfortunate,
you will have a speedy recovery and your fortune will ripen.
To lovers, it is the promise of wealth and faithfulness.

To dream that you start to Paradise and find yourself bewildered and lost,
you will undertake enterprises which look exceedingly feasible and full
of fortunate returns, but which will prove disappointing and vexatious.

_Paralysis_.

Paralysis is a bad dream, denoting financial reverses and disappointment
in literary attainment.  To lovers, it portends a cessation of affections.

_Parasol_.[146]

To dream of a parasol, denotes, for married people, illicit enjoyments.

If a young woman has this dream, she will engage in many flirtations,
some of which will cause her interesting disturbances, lest her lover
find out her inclinations.


[146] See Umbrella.

_Parcel_.

To dream of a parcel being delivered to you, denotes that you
will be pleasantly surprised by the return of some absent one,
or be cared for in a worldly way.

If you carry a parcel, you will have some unpleasant task to perform.

To let a parcel fall on the way as you go to deliver it,
you will see some deal fail to go through.

_Pardon_.[147]

To dream that you are endeavoring to gain pardon for an offense
which you never committed, denotes that you will be troubled,
and seemingly with cause, over your affairs, but it will finally
appear that it was for your advancement.  If offense was committed,
you will realize embarrassment in affairs.

To receive pardon, you will prosper after a series of misfortunes.


[147] See kindred words.

_Parents_.[148]

To see your parents looking cheerful while dreaming, denotes harmony
and pleasant associates.

If they appear to you after they are dead, it is a warning of
approaching trouble, and you should be particular of your dealings.

To see them while they are living, and they seem to be
in your home and happy, denotes pleasant changes for you.
To a young woman, this usually brings marriage and prosperity.
If pale and attired in black, grave disappointments will harass you.

To dream of seeing your parents looking robust and contented, denotes you are
under fortunate environments; your business and love interests will flourish.
If they appear indisposed or sad, you will find life's favors passing you
by without recognition.


[148] See Father and Mother.

_Park_.

To dream of walking through a well-kept park, denotes enjoyable leisure.
If you walk with your lover, you will be comfortably and happily married.
Ill-kept parks, devoid of green grasses and foliage, is ominous
of unexpected reverses.

_Parrot_.

Parrots chattering in your dreams, signifies frivolous employments and idle
gossip among your friends.

To see them in repose, denotes a peaceful intermission of family broils.

For a young woman to dream that she owns a parrot, denotes that her lover
will believe her to be quarrelsome.

To teach a parrot, you will have trouble in your private affairs.

A dead parrot, foretells the loss of social friends.

_Parsley_.

To dream of parsley, denotes hard-earned success, usually the surroundings
of the dreamer are healthful and lively.

To eat parsley, is a sign of good health, but the care of a large
family will be your portion.

_Parsnips_.

To see or eat parsnips, is a favorable omen of successful business or trade,
but love will take on unfavorable and gloomy aspects.

_Parting_.

To dream of parting with friends and companions, denotes that many little
vexations will come into your daily life.

If you part with enemies, it is a sign of success in love and business.

_Partner_.

To dream of seeing your business partner with a basket of crockery
on his back, and, letting it fall, gets it mixed with other crockery,
denotes your business will sustain a loss through the indiscriminate
dealings of your partner.  If you reprimand him for it, you will,
to some extent, recover the loss.

_Partnership_.

To dream of forming a partnership with a man, denotes uncertain
and fluctuating money affairs.  If your partner be a woman,
you will engage in some enterprise which you will endeavor
to keep hidden from friends.

To dissolve an unpleasant partnership, denotes that things will arrange
themselves agreeable to your desires; but if the partnership was pleasant,
there will be disquieting news and disagreeable turns in your affairs.

_Partridge_.

Partridges seen in your dreams, denotes that conditions will be
good in your immediate future for the accumulation of property.

To ensnare them, signifies that you will be fortunate in expectations.

To kill them, foretells that you will be successful, but much
of your wealth will be given to others.

To eat them, signifies the enjoyment of deserved honors.

To see them flying, denotes that a promising future is before you.

_Party_.

To dream of an unknown party of men assaulting you for your money
or valuables, denotes that you will have enemies banded together against you.
If you escape uninjured, you will overcome any opposition, either in
business or love.

To dream of attending a party of any kind for pleasure, you will find
that life has much good, unless the party is an inharmonious one.

_Passenger_.

To dream that you see passengers coming in with their luggage,
denotes improvement in your surroundings.  If they are leaving
you will lose an opportunity of gaining some desired property.
If you are one of the passengers leaving home, you will be
dissatisfied with your present living and will seek to change it.

_Passing Bell_.

To hear a passing bell, unexpected intelligence of the sorrow
or illness of the absent.

To ring one yourself, denotes ill health and reverses.

_Password_.

To dream of a password, foretells you will have influential aid
in some slight trouble soon to attack you.  For a woman to dream
that she has given away the password, signifies she will endanger
her own standing through seeking frivolous or illicit desires.

_Pasteboard_.

To dream of pasteboard, denotes that unfaithful friends will deceive
you concerning important matters.  To cut pasteboard, you will throw
aside difficulties in your struggle to reach eminent positions.

_Pastry_.[149]

To dream of pastry, denotes that you will be deceived by some artful person.

To eat it, implies heartfelt friendships.

If a young woman dreams that she is cooking it, she will fail
to deceive others as to her real intentions.


[149] See Pies.

_Patch_.

To dream that you have patches upon your clothing, denotes that you
will show no false pride in the discharge of obligations.

To see others wearing patches, denotes want and misery are near.

If a young woman discovers a patch on her new dress, it indicates
that she will find trouble facing her when she imagines her happiest
moments are approaching near.  If she tries to hide the patches,
she will endeavor to keep some ugly trait in her character from her lover.
If she is patching, she will assume duties for which she has no liking.

For a woman to do family patching, denotes close and loving bonds
in the family, but a scarcity of means is portended.

_Patent_.

To dream of securing a patent, denotes that you will be careful
and painstaking with any task you set about to accomplish.
If you fail in securing your patent, you will suffer failure
for the reason that you are engaging in enterprises for which you
have no ability.

If you buy one, you will have occasion to make a tiresome
and fruitless journey.

To see one, you will suffer unpleasantness from illness.

_Patent Medicine_.

To dream that you resort to patent medicine in your search for health,
denotes that you will use desperate measures in advancing your fortune,
but you will succeed, to the disappointment of the envious.

To see or manufacture patent medicines, you will rise from obscurity
to positions above your highest imaginings.

_Path_.

To dream that you are walking in a narrow and rough path,
stumbling over rocks and other obstructions, denotes that you
will have a rough encounter with adversity, and feverish
excitement will weigh heavily upon you.

To dream that you are trying to find your path, foretells that you will fail
to accomplish some work that you have striven to push to desired ends.

To walk through a pathway bordered with green grass and flowers,
denotes your freedom from oppressing loves.

_Paunch_.

To see a large paunch, denotes wealth and the total absence of refinement.

To see a shriveled paunch, foretells illness and reverses.

_Pauper_.[150]

To dream that you are a pauper, implies unpleasant happenings for you.

To see paupers, denotes that there will be a call upon your generosity.


[150] See Beggars and kindred words.

_Pawn-shop_.

If in your dreams you enter a pawn-shop, you will find disappointments
and losses in your waking moments.

To pawn articles, you will have unpleasant scenes with your wife
or sweetheart, and perhaps disappointments in business.

For a woman to go to a pawn-shop, denotes that she is guilty of indiscretions,
and she is likely to regret the loss of a friend.

To redeem an article, denotes that you will regain lost positions.

To dream that you see a pawn-shop, denotes you are negligent
of your trust and are in danger of sacrificing your honorable
name in some salacious affair.

_Peaches_.[151]

Dreaming of seeing or eating peaches, implies the sickness of children,
disappointing returns in business, and failure to make anticipated
visits of pleasure; but if you see them on trees with foliage,
you will secure some desired position or thing after much striving
and risking of health and money.

To see dried peaches, denotes that enemies will steal from you.

For a young woman to dream of gathering luscious peaches from
well-filled trees, she will, by her personal charms and qualifications,
win a husband rich in worldly goods and wise in travel.
If the peaches prove to be green and knotty, she will meet
with unkindness from relatives and ill health will steal
away her attractions.


[151] See Orchard.

_Peacock_.

For persons dreaming of peacocks, there lies below the brilliant
and flashing ebb and flow of the stream of pleasure and riches,
the slums of sorrow and failure, which threaten to mix with its
clearness at the least disturbing influence.

For a woman to dream that she owns peacocks, denotes that she
will be deceived in her estimate of man's honor.

To hear their harsh voices while looking upon their proudly spread plumage,
denotes that some beautiful and well-appearing person will work you discomfort
and uneasiness of mind.

_Pearls_.

To dream of pearls, is a forerunner of good business and trade
and affairs of social nature.

If a young woman dreams that her lover sends her gifts of pearls,
she will indeed be most fortunate, as there will be occasions of
festivity and pleasure for her, besides a loving and faithful affianced
devoid of the jealous inclinations so ruinous to the peace of lovers.
If she loses or breaks her pearls, she will suffer indescribable
sadness and sorrow through bereavement or misunderstandings.
To find herself admiring them, she will covet and strive for love
or possessions with a pureness of purpose.

_Pears_.

To dream of eating pears, denotes poor success and debilitating health.

To admire the golden fruit upon graceful trees, denotes that fortune
will wear a more promising aspect than formerly.

To dream of gathering them, denotes pleasant surprises will follow
quickly upon disappointment.

To preserve them, denotes that you will take reverses philosophically.

Baking them, denotes insipid love and friendships.

_Peas_.

Dreaming of eating peas, augurs robust health and the accumulation of wealth.
Much activity is indicated for farmers and their women folks.

To see them growing, denotes fortunate enterprises.

To plant them, denotes that your hopes are well grounded and they
will be realized.

To gather them, signifies that your plans will culminate in good and you
will enjoy the fruits of your labors.

To dream of canned peas, denotes that your brightest hopes
will be enthralled in uncertainties for a short season,
but they will finally be released by fortune.

To see dried peas, denotes that you are overtaxing your health.

To eat dried peas, foretells that you will, after much success,
suffer a slight decrease in pleasure or wealth.

_Pebbles_.

For a young woman to dream of a pebble-strewn walk, she will be vexed
with many rivals and find that there are others with charms that attract
besides her own.  She who dreams of pebbles is selfish and should cultivate
leniency towards others' faults.

_Pecans_.

To dream of eating this appetizing nut, you will see one of your dearest
plans come to full fruition, and seeming failure prove a prosperous
source of gain.

To see them growing among leaves, signifies a long, peaceful existence.
Failure in love or business will follow in proportion as the pecan is decayed.

If they are difficult to crack and the fruit is small, you will succeed
after much trouble and expense, but returns will be meagre.

_Pelican_.

To dream of a pelican, denotes a mingling of disappointments with successes.

To catch one, you will be able to overcome disappointing influences.

To kill one, denotes that you will cruelly set aside the rights of others.

To see them flying, you are threatened with changes, which will impress
you with ideas of uncertainty as to good.

_Pen_.

To dream of a pen, foretells you are unfortunately being
led into serious complications by your love of adventure.
If the pen refuses to write, you will be charged with a serious
breach of morality.

_Penalties_.

To dream that you have penalties imposed upon you, foretells that you
will have duties that will rile you and find you rebellious.

To pay a penalty, denotes sickness and financial loss.
To escape the payment, you will be victor in some contest.

_Pencil_.

To dream of pencils, denotes favorable occupations.
For a young woman to write with one, foretells she will
be fortunate in marriage, if she does not rub out words;
in that case, she will be disappointed in her lover.

_Penitentiary_.

To dream of a penitentiary, denotes you will have engagements
which will, unfortunately, result in your loss.  To be an inmate
of one, foretells discontent in the home and failing business.
To escape from one, you will overcome difficult obstacles.

_Penny_.

To dream of pennies, denotes unsatisfactory pursuits.
Business will suffer, and lovers and friends will complain
of the smallness of affection.

To lose them, signifies small deference and failures.

To find them, denotes that prospects will advance to your improvement.

To count pennies, foretells that you will be business-like and economical.

_Pension_.

To dream of drawing a pension, foretells that you will be aided
in your labors by friends.

To fail in your application for a pension, denotes that you will lose
in an undertaking and suffer the loss of friendships.

_People_.[152]


[152] See Crowd.

_Pepper_.

To dream of pepper burning your tongue, foretells that you will suffer
from your acquaintances through your love of gossip.

To see red pepper growing, foretells for you a thrifty and an independent
partner in the marriage state.

To see piles of red pepper pods, signifies that you will aggressively
maintain your rights.

To grind black pepper, denotes that you will be victimized by the wiles
of ingenious men or women.  To see it in stands on the table, omens sharp
reproaches or quarrels.

For a young woman to put it on her food, foretells that she will be deceived
by her friends.

_Peppermint_.

To dream of peppermint, denotes pleasant entertainments
and interesting affairs.

To see it growing, denotes that you will participate in some pleasure
in which there will be a dash of romance.

To enjoy drinks in which there is an effusion of peppermint, denotes that
you will enjoy assignations with some attractive and fascinating person.
To a young woman, this dream warns her against seductive pleasures.

_Perfume_.

To dream of inhaling perfume, is an augury of happy incidents.

For you to perfume your garments and person, denotes that you
will seek and obtain adulation.

Being oppressed by it to intoxication, denotes that excesses in joy
will impair your mental qualities.

To spill perfume, denotes that you will lose something which
affords you pleasure.

To break a bottle of perfume, foretells that your most cherished
wishes and desires will end disastrously, even while they promise
a happy culmination.

To dream that you are distilling perfume, denotes that your employments
and associations will be of the pleasantest character.

For a young woman to dream of perfuming her bath, foretells
ecstatic happenings.  If she receives it as a gift from a man,
she will experience fascinating, but dangerous pleasures.

_Perspiration_.

To dream that you are in a perspiration, foretells that you
will come out of some difficulty, which has caused much gossip,
with new honors.

_Pest_.

To dream of being worried over a pest of any nature, foretells that disturbing
elements will prevail in your immediate future.

To see others thus worried, denotes that you will be annoyed
by some displeasing development.

_Petticoat_.

To dream of seeing new petticoats, denotes that pride in your belongings
will make you an object of raillery among your acquaintances.

To see them soiled or torn, portends that your reputation will be
in great danger.

If a young woman dream that she wears silken, or clean, petticoats,
it denotes that she will have a doting, but manly husband.
If she suddenly perceives that she has left off her petticoat
in dressing, it portends much ill luck and disappointment.
To see her petticoat falling from its place while she is
at some gathering, or while walking, she will have trouble
in retaining her lover, and other disappointments may follow.

_Pewter_.[153]

To dream of pewter, foretells straitened circumstances.


[153] See Dishes.

_Phantom_.[154]

To dream that a phantom pursues you, foretells strange
and disquieting experiences.

To see a phantom fleeing from you, foretells that trouble
will assume smaller proportions.


[154] See Ghost.

_Pheasant_.

Dreaming of pheasants, omens good fellowship among your friends.

To eat one, signifies that the jealousy of your wife will cause
you to forego friendly intercourse with your friends.

To shoot them, denotes that you will fail to sacrifice one selfish pleasure
for the comfort of friends.

_Phosphorus_.

To dream of seeing phosphorus, is indicative of evanescent joys.

For a young woman, it foretells a brilliant but brief success with admirers.

_Photography_.

If you see photographs in your dreams, it is a sign of approaching deception.

If you receive the photograph of your lover, you are warned
that he is not giving you his undivided loyalty, while he tries
to so impress you.

For married people to dream of the possession of other persons'
photographs, foretells unwelcome disclosures of one's conduct.

To dream that you are having your own photograph made, foretells that you
will unwarily cause yourself and others' trouble.

_Physician_.

For a young woman to dream of a physician, denotes that she
is sacrificing her beauty in engaging in frivolous pastimes.
If she is sick and thus dreams, she will have sickness or worry,
but will soon overcome them, unless the physician appears very anxious,
and then her trials may increase, ending in loss and sorrow.

_Piano_.

To dream of seeing a piano, denotes some joyful occasion.

To hear sweet and voluptuous harmony from a piano,
signals success and health.  If discordant music is being played,
you will have many exasperating matters to consider.
Sad and plaintive music, foretells sorrowful tidings.

To find your piano broken and out of tune, portends dissatisfaction
with your own accomplishments and disappointment in the failure
of your friends or children to win honors.

To see an old-fashioned piano, denotes that you have, in trying moments,
neglected the advices and opportunities of the past, and are warned
not to do so again.

For a young woman to dream that she is executing difficult,
but entrancing music, she will succeed in winning an indifferent
friend to be a most devoted and loyal lover.

_Pickaxe_.

To dream of a pickaxe, denotes a relentless enemy is working to overthrow
you socially.  A broken one, implies disaster to all your interests.

_Pickles_.

To dream of pickles, denotes that you will follow worthless pursuits if you
fail to call energy and judgment to your aid.

For a young woman to dream of eating pickles, foretells an unambitious career.

To dream of pickles, denotes vexation in love, but final triumph.

For a young woman to dream that she is eating them, or is hungry
for them, foretells she will find many rivals, and will be overcome
unless she is careful of her private affairs.  Impure pickles,
indicate disappointing engagements and love quarrels.

_Pickpocket_.

To dream of a pickpocket, foretells some enemy will succeed
in harassing and causing you loss.  For a young woman to have her
pocket picked, denotes she will be the object of some person's
envy and spite, and may lose the regard of a friend through
these evil machinations, unless she keeps her own counsel.
If she picks others' pockets, she will incur the displeasure
of a companion by her coarse behavior.

_Picnic_.[155]

To dream of attending a picnic, foreshadows success and real enjoyment.

Dreams of picnics, bring undivided happiness to the young.

Storms, or any interfering elements at a picnic, implies the temporary
displacement of assured profit and pleasure in love or business.


[155] See Kindred Words.

_Pictures_.[156]

Pictures appearing before you in dreams, prognosticate deception
and the ill will of contemporaries.

To make a picture, denotes that you will engage in
some unremunerative enterprise.

To destroy pictures, means that you will be pardoned for using
strenuous means to establish your rights.

To buy them, foretells worthless speculation.

To dream of seeing your likeness in a living tree, appearing and disappearing,
denotes that you will be prosperous and seemingly contented, but there
will be disappointments in reaching out for companionship and reciprocal
understanding of ideas and plans.

To dream of being surrounded with the best efforts of the old
and modern masters, denotes that you will have insatiable longings
and desires for higher attainments, compared to which present
success will seem poverty-stricken and miserable.


[156] See Painting and Photographs.

_Pier_.

To stand upon a pier in your dream, denotes that you will be
brave in your battle for recognition in prosperity's realm,
and that you will be admitted to the highest posts of honor.

If you strive to reach a pier and fail, you will lose the distinction
you most coveted.

_Pies_.[157]

To dream of eating pies, you will do well to watch your enemies,
as they are planning to injure you.

For a young woman to dream of making pies, denotes that she will flirt
with men for pastime.  She should accept this warning.


[157] See Pastry.

_Pig_.[158]

To dream of a fat, healthy pig, denotes reasonable success in affairs.
If they are wallowing in mire, you will have hurtful associates,
and your engagements will be subject to reproach.  This dream will bring
to a young woman a jealous and greedy companion though the chances
are that he will be wealthy.


[158] See Hog.

_Pigeon_.

To dream of seeing pigeons and hearing them cooing above their cotes,
denotes domestic peace and pleasure-giving children.  For a young woman,
this dream indicates an early and comfortable union.

To see them being used in a shooting match, and, if you participate,
it denotes that cruelty in your nature will show in your dealings,
and you are warned of low and debasing pleasures.

To see them flying, denotes freedom from misunderstanding,
and perhaps news from the absent.

_Pilgrim_.

To dream of pilgrims, denotes that you will go on an extended journey,
leaving home and its dearest objects in the mistaken idea that it must
be thus for their good.

To dream that you are a pilgrim, portends struggles with poverty
and unsympathetic companions.

For a young woman to dream that a pilgrim approaches her,
she will fall an easy dupe to deceit.  If he leaves her,
she will awaken to her weakness of character and strive
to strengthen independent thought.

_Pill_.

To dream that you take pills, denotes that you will have responsibilities
to look after, but they will bring you no little comfort and enjoyment.

To give them to others, signifies that you will be criticised
for your disagreeableness.

_Pillow_.

To dream of a pillow, denotes luxury and comfort.

For a young woman to dream that she makes a pillow, she will have encouraging
prospects of a pleasant future.

_Pimple_.

To dream of your flesh being full of pimples, denotes worry over trifles.

To see others with pimples on them, signifies that you will be troubled
with illness and complaints from others.

For a woman to dream that her beauty is marred by pimples, her conduct
in home or social circles will be criticised by friends and acquaintances.
You may have small annoyances to follow this dream.

_Pincers_.

To dream of feeling pincers on your flesh, denotes that you
will be burdened with exasperating cares.  Any dream of pincers,
signifies unfortunate incidents.

_Pineapple_.

To dream of pineapples, is exceedingly propitious.
Success will follow in the near future, if you gather pineapples
or eat them.

To dream that you prick your fingers while preparing a pineapple
for the table, you will experience considerable vexation over matters
which will finally bring pleasure and success.

_Pine Tree_.

To see a pine tree in a dream, foretells unvarying success
in any undertaking.  Dead pine, for a woman, represents
bereavement and cares.

_Pins_.

To dream of pins, augurs differences and quarrels ill families.

To a young woman, they warn her of unladylike conduct towards her lover.

To dream of swallowing a pin, denotes that accidents will force
you into perilous conditions.

To lose one, implies a petty loss or disagreement.

To see a bent or rusty pin, signifies that you will lose esteem
because of your careless ways.

To stick one into your flesh, denotes that some person will irritate you.

_Pipe_.

Pipes seen in dreams, are representatives of peace and comfort
after many struggles.

Sewer, gas, and such like pipes, denotes unusual thought and prosperity
in your community.

Old and broken pipe, signifies ill health and stagnation of business.

To dream that you smoke a pipe, denotes that you will enjoy the visit of an
old friend, and peaceful settlements of differences will also take place.

_Pirate_.

To dream of pirates, denotes that you will be exposed to the evil
designs of false friends.

To dream that you are a pirate, denotes that you will fall beneath
the society of friends and former equals.

For a young woman to dream that her lover is a pirate, is a sign
of his unworthiness and deceitfulness.  If she is captured by pirates,
she will be induced to leave her home under false pretenses.

_Pistol_.

Seeing a pistol in your dream, denotes bad fortune, generally.

If you own one, you will cultivate a low, designing character.

If you hear the report of one, you will be made aware of some scheme
to ruin your interests.

To dream of shooting off your pistol, signifies that you will
bear some innocent person envy, and you will go far to revenge
the imagined wrong.

_Pit_.

If you are looking into a deep pit in your dream, you will run silly risks
in business ventures and will draw uneasiness about your wooing.

To fall into a pit denotes calamity and deep sorrow.
To wake as you begin to feel yourself falling into the pit,
brings you out of distress in fairly good shape.

To dream that you are descending into one, signifies that you
will knowingly risk health and fortune for greater success.

_Pitcher_.

To dream of a pitcher, denotes that you will be of a generous
and congenial disposition.  Success will attend your efforts.

A broken pitcher, denotes loss of friends.

_Pitchfork_.

Pitchforks in dreams, denotes struggles for betterment of fortune
and great laboring, either physically or mentally.

To dream that you are attacked by some person using a pitchfork,
implies that you will have personal enemies who would not scruple
to harm you.

_Plague_.

To dream of a plague raging, denotes disappointing returns in business,
and your wife or lover will lead you a wretched existence.

If you are afflicted with the plague, you will keep your
business out of embarrassment with the greatest maneuvering.
If you are trying to escape it, some trouble, which looks impenetrable,
is pursuing you.

_Plain_.[159]

For a young woman to dream of crossing a plain, denotes that she
will be fortunately situated, if the grasses are green and luxuriant;
if they are arid, or the grass is dead, she will have much
discomfort and loneliness.


[159] See Prairie.

_Plane_.

To dream that you use a plane, denotes that your liberality and successful
efforts will be highly commended.

To see carpenters using their planes, denotes that you will progress
smoothly in your undertakings.

To dream of seeing planes, denotes congeniality and even success.

A love of the real, and not the false, is portended by this dream.

_Planet_.

To dream of a planet, foretells an uncomfortable journey and depressing work.

_Plank_.

For a young woman to dream that she is walking across muddy water
on a rotten plank, denotes that she will feel keenly the indifference
shown her by one she loves, or other troubles may arise;
or her defence of honor may be in danger of collapse.

Walking a good, sound plank, is a good omen, but a person will have
to be unusually careful in conduct after such a dream.

_Plaster_.

To dream of seeing walls plainly plastered, denotes that success will come,
but it will not be stable.

To have plaster fall upon you, denotes unmitigated disasters and disclosure.

To see plasterers at work, denotes that you will have a sufficient
competency to live above penury.

_Plate_.[160]

For a woman to dream of plates, denotes that she will practise economy and win
a worthy husband.  If already married, she will retain her husband's love
and respect by the wise ordering of his household.


[160] See Dishes.

_Play_.[161]

For a young woman to dream that she attends a play,
foretells that she will be courted by a genial friend,
and will marry to further her prospects and pleasure seeking.
If there is trouble in getting to and from the play,
or discordant and hideous scenes, she will be confronted
with many displeasing surprises.


[161] See Theater.

_Pleasure_.[162]

To dream of pleasure, denotes gain and personal enjoyment.


[162] See Joy.

_Plow_.

To dream of a plow, signifies unusual success, and affairs will reach
a pleasing culmination.

To see persons plowing, denotes activity and advancement
in knowledge and fortune.

For a young woman to see her lover plowing, indicates that she will have
a noble and wealthy husband.  Her joys will be deep and lasting.

To plow yourself, denotes rapid increase in property and joys.

_Plums_.

Plums, if they are green, unless seen on trees, are signs of personal
and relative discomfort.

To see them ripe, denotes joyous occasions, which, however, will be
of short duration.

To eat them, denotes that you will engage in flirtations
and other evanescent pleasures.

To gather them, you will obtain your desires, but they will not prove
so solid as you had imagined.

If you find yourself gathering them up from the ground, and find rotten
ones among the good, you will be forced to admit that your expectations
are unrealized, and that there is no life filled with pleasure alone.

_Pocket_.

To dream of your pocket, is a sign of evil demonstrations against you.

_Pocketbook_.

To find a pocketbook filled with bills and money in your dreams,
you will be quite lucky, gaining in nearly every instance your desire.
If empty, you will be disappointed in some big hope.

If you lose your pocketbook, you will unfortunately disagree with your
best friend, and thereby lose much comfort and real gain.

_Poinard_.[163]

To dream of some one stabbing you with a poinard, denotes that secret
enemies will cause you uneasiness of mind.

If you attack any person with one of these weapons, you will unfortunately
suspect your friends of unfaithfulness.

Dreaming of poinards, omens evil.


[163] See Dagger.

_Poison_.

To fed that you are poisoned in a dream, denotes that some painful
influence will immediately reach you.

If you seek to use poison on others, you will be guilty of base thoughts,
or the world will go wrong for you.

For a young woman to dream that she endeavors to rid herself
of a rival in this way, she will be likely to have a deal
of trouble in securing a lover.

To throw the poison away, denotes that by sheer force you
will overcome unsatisfactory conditions.

To handle poison, or see others with it, signifies that unpleasantness
will surround you.

To dream that your relatives or children are poisoned, you will receive
injury from unsuspected sources.

If an enemy or rival is poisoned, you will overcome obstacles.

To recover from the effects of poison, indicates that you
will succeed after worry.

To take strychnine or other poisonous medicine under the advice
of a physician, denotes that you will undertake some affair
fraught with danger.

_Poker_.

To dream of seeing a red hot poker, or fighting with one,
signifies that you will meet trouble with combative energy.

To play at poker, warns you against evil company; and young women,
especially, will lose their moral distinctiveness if they find
themselves engaged in this game.

_Polar Bear_.[164]

Polar bears in dreams, are prognostic of deceit,
as misfortune will approach you in a seeming fair aspect.
Your bitterest enemies will wear the garb of friendship.
Rivals will try to supersede you.

To see the skin of one, denotes that you will successfully
overcome any opposition.


[164] See Bear.

_Pole-cat_.

To dream of a pole-cat, signifies salacious scandals.

To inhale the odor of a pole-cat on your clothes, or otherwise smell one,
you will find that your conduct will be considered rude, and your affairs
will prove unsatisfactory.

To kill one, denotes that you will overcome formidable obstacles.

_Police_.

If the police are trying to arrest you for some crime of which you
are innocent, it foretells that you will successfully outstrip rivalry.

If the arrest is just, you will have a season of unfortunate incidents.

To see police on parole, indicates alarming fluctuations in affairs.

_Polishing_.

To dream of polishing any article, high attainments will place
you in enviable positions.

_Politician_.

To dream of a politician, denotes displeasing companionships,
and incidences where you will lose time and means.

If you engage in political wrangling, it portends that misunderstandings
and ill feeling will be shown you by friends.

For a young woman to dream of taking interest in politics,
warns her against designing duplicity,

_Polka_.[165]

To dream of dancing the polka, denotes pleasant occupations.


[165] See Dancing.

_Pomegranate_.

Pomegranates, when dreamed of, denotes that you will wisely use
your talents for the enrichment of the mind rather than seeking
those pleasures which destroy morality and health.

If your sweetheart gives you one, you will be lured by artful
wiles to the verge of distraction by woman's charms, but inner
forces will hold you safe from thralldom.

To eat one, signifies that you will yield yourself a captive
to the personal charms of another.

_Pond_.[166]

To see a pond in your dream, denotes that events will bring no emotion,
and fortune will retain a placid outlook.

If the pond is muddy, you will have domestic quarrels.


[166] See Water Puddle and kindred words.

_Pony_.

To see ponies in your dreams, signifies moderate speculations
will be rewarded with success.

_Poor_.[167]

To dream that you, or any of your friends, appear to be poor,
is significant of worry and losses.


[167] See Pauper.

_Poor-house_.

To see a poor-house in your dream, denotes you have unfaithful friends,
who will care for you only as they can use your money and belongings.

_Pope_.

Any dream in which you see the Pope, without speaking to him,
warns you of servitude.  You will bow to the will of some master,
even to that of women.

To speak to the Pope, denotes that certain high honors are in store for you.
To see the Pope looking sad or displeased, warns you against vice or sorrow
of some kind.

_Poplars_.

To dream of seeing poplars, is an omen of good, if they are in leaf or bloom.

For a young woman to stand by her lover beneath the blossoms and leaves
of a tulip poplar, she will realize her most extravagant hopes.

Her lover will be handsome and polished.  Wealth and friends will be hers.
If they are leafless and withered, she will meet with disappointments.

_Poppies_.

Poppies seen in dreams, represents a season of seductive pleasures
and flattering business, but they all occupy unstable foundations.

If you inhale the odor of one, you will be the victim of artful
persuasions and flattery.

(The mesmeric influence of the poppy inducts one into strange atmospheres,
leaving materiality behind while the subjective self explores these realms
as in natural sleep; yet these dreams do not bear truthful warnings
to the material man.  Being, in a manner, enforced.)

_Porcelain_.

To dream of porcelain, signifies you will have favorable opportunities
of progressing in your affairs.  To see it broken or soiled,
denotes mistakes will be made which will cause grave offense.

_Porch_.

To dream of a porch, denotes that you will engage a new undertakings,
and the future will be full of uncertainties.

If a young woman dreams that she is with her lover on a porch,
implies her doubts of some one's intentions.

To dream that you build a porch, you will assume new duties.

_Porcupine_.

To see a porcupine in your dreams, denotes that you will disapprove
any new enterprise and repel new friendships with coldness.

For a young woman to dream of a porcupine, portends that she
will fear her lover.

To see a dead one, signifies your abolishment of ill feelings and possessions.

_Pork_.[168]

If you eat pork in your dreams, you will encounter real trouble,
but if you only see pork, you will come out of a conflict victoriously.


Back to Full Books