The 1994 Edition of the CIA World Factbook

Central Intelligence Agency 

The World Factbook 1994 

US Government officials should obtain copies of The World Factbook directly from 
their own organization or through liaison channels from the Central Intelligence 
Agency. This publication is also available in microfiche, magnetic tape, or 
diskettes for microcomputers. 

This publication may be purchased by telephone (VISA or MasterCard) or mail 
from: 
Superintendent of Documents 
P.O. Box 371954 
Pittsburgh, PA 15250-7954 
Telephone: (202) 783-3238 

A subscription to this publication may be purchased from: 
Document Expediting (DOCEX) Project 
Exchange and Gift Division 
Library of Congress 
Washington, DC 20540 
Telephone: (202) 707-9527 

This publication may be purchased in printed form, photocopy, microfiche,  
magnetic tape, or diskettes for microcomputers from: 
National Technical Information Service 
5285 Port Royal Road 
Springfield, VA 22161 
Telephone: (703) 487-4650 

This publication may be purchased in photocopy or microform from:  
Photoduplication Service Library of Congress 
Washington, DC 20540-5234 
Telephone: (202) 707-5640 

The World Factbook is produced annually by the Central Intelligence Agency for 
the use of US Government officials, and the style, format, coverage, and content 
are designed to meet their specific requirements. Information was provided by 
the Bureau of the Census, Central Intelligence Agency, Defense Intelligence 
Agency, Defense Nuclear Agency, Department of State, Maritime Administration, 
National Science Foundation (Polar Information Program), Naval Maritime 
Intelligence Center, Office of Territorial and International Affairs, US Board 
on Geographic Names, US Coast Guard, and others. 

Comments and queries are welcome and may be addressed to: 
Central Intelligence Agency 
Attn.: Office of Public and Agency Information 
Washington, DC 20505 
Telephone: (703) 351-2053 

Notes, Definitions, and Abbreviations 

A 
Afghanistan 
Albania 
Algeria 
American Samoa 
Andorra 
Angola 
Anguilla 
Antarctica 
Antigua and Barbuda 
Arctic Ocean 
Argentina 
Armenia 
Aruba 
Ashmore and Cartier Islands 
Atlantic Ocean 
Australia 
Austria 
Azerbaijan 

B 
Bahamas, The 
Bahrain 
Baker Island 
Bangladesh 
Barbados 
Bassas da India 
Belarus 
Belgium 
Belize 
Benin 
Bermuda 
Bhutan 
Bolivia 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
Botswana 
Bouvet Island 
Brazil 
British Indian Ocean Territory 
British Virgin Islands 
Brunei 
Bulgaria 
Burkina 
Burma 
Burundi 

C 
Cambodia 
Cameroon 
Canada 
Cape Verde 
Cayman Islands 
Central African Republic 
Chad 
Chile 
China (also see separate Taiwan entry) 
Christmas Island 
Clipperton Island 
Cocos (Keeling) Islands 
Colombia 
Comoros 
Congo 
Cook Islands 
Coral Sea Islands 
Costa Rica 
Cote d'Ivoire 
Croatia 
Cuba 
Cyprus 
Czech Republic 

D 
Denmark 
Djibouti 
Dominica 
Dominican Republic 

E 
Ecuador 
Egypt 
El Salvador 
Equatorial Guinea 
Eritrea 
Estonia 
Ethiopia 
Europa Island 

F 
Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas) 
Faroe Islands 
Fiji 
Finland 
France 
French Guiana 
French Polynesia 
French Southern and Antarctic Lands 

G 
Gabon 
Gambia, The 
Gaza Strip 
Georgia 
Germany 
Ghana 
Gibraltar 
Glorioso Islands 
Greece 
Greenland 
Grenada 
Guadeloupe 
Guam 
Guatemala 
Guernsey 
Guinea 
Guinea-Bissau 
Guyana 

H 
Haiti 
Heard Island and McDonald Islands 
Holy See (Vatican City) 
Honduras 
Hong Kong 
Howland Island 
Hungary 

I 
Iceland 
India 
Indian Ocean 
Indonesia 
Iran 
Iraq 
Ireland 
Israel (also see separate Gaza Strip and West Bank entries) 
Italy 

J 
Jamaica 
Jan Mayen 
Japan 
Jarvis Island 
Jersey 
Johnston Atoll 
Jordan (also see separate West Bank entry) 
Juan de Nova Island 

K 
Kazakhstan 
Kenya 
Kingman Reef 
Kiribati 
Korea, North 
Korea, South 
Kuwait 
Kyrgyzstan 

L 
Laos 
Latvia 
Lebanon 
Lesotho 
Liberia 
Libya 
Liechtenstein 
Lithuania 
Luxembourg 

M 
Macau 
Macedonia entry follows Thailand 
Madagascar 
Malawi 
Malaysia 
Maldives 
Mali 
Malta 
Man, Isle of 
Marshall Islands 
Martinique 
Mauritania 
Mauritius 
Mayotte 
Mexico 
Micronesia, Federated States of 
Midway Islands 
Moldova 
Monaco 
Mongolia 
Montserrat 
Morocco 
Mozambique 

N 
Namibia 
Nauru 
Navassa Island 
Nepal 
Netherlands 
Netherlands Antilles 
New Caledonia 
New Zealand 
Nicaragua 
Niger 
Nigeria 
Niue 
Norfolk Island 
Northern Mariana Islands 
Norway 

O 
Oman 

P 
Pacific Islands (Palau), Trust Territory of the 
Pacific Ocean 
Pakistan 
Palmyra Atoll 
Panama 
Papua New Guinea 
Paracel Islands 
Paraguay 
Peru 
Philippines 
Pitcairn Islands 
Poland 
Portugal 
Puerto Rico 

Q 
Qatar 

R 
Reunion 
Romania 
Russia 
Rwanda 

S 
Saint Helena 
Saint Kitts and Nevis 
Saint Lucia 
Saint Pierre and Miquelon 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines 
San Marino 
Sao Tome and Principe 
Saudi Arabia 
Senegal 
Serbia and Montenegro 
Seychelles 
Sierra Leone 
Singapore 
Slovakia 
Slovenia 
Solomon Islands 
Somalia 
South Africa 
South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands 
Spain 
Spratly Islands 
Sri Lanka 
Sudan 
Suriname 
Svalbard 
Swaziland 
Sweden 
Switzerland 
Syria 

T 
Taiwan 
Tajikistan 
Tanzania 
Thailand 
The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia 
Togo 
Tokelau 
Tonga 
Trinidad and Tobago 
Tromelin Island 
Tunisia 
Turkey 
Turkmenistan 
Turks and Caicos Islands 
Tuvalu 

U 
Uganda 
Ukraine 
United Arab Emirates 
United Kingdom 
United States 
Uruguay 
Uzbekistan 

V 
Vanuatu 
Venezuela 
Vietnam 
Virgin Islands 

W 
Wake Island 
Wallis and Futuna 
West Bank 
Western Sahara 
Western Samoa 
World 

Y 
Yemen 

Z 
Zaire 
Zambia 
Zimbabwe  

Appendixes 
A: The United Nations System 
B: Abbreviations for International Organizations and Groups 
C: International Organizations and Groups 
D: Abbreviations for Selected International Environmental Agreements 
E: Selected International Environmental Agreements  
F: Weights and Measures 
G: Cross-Reference List of Geographic Names 

Reference Maps 
The World 
North America 
Central America and the Caribbean 
South America 
Europe 
Ethnic Groups in Eastern Europe 
Middle East 
Africa 
Asia 
Commonwealth of Independent States--European States 
Commonwealth of Independent States--Central Asian States 
Southeast Asia 
Oceania 
Arctic Region 
Antarctic Region 
Standard Time Zones of the World 


There have been some significant changes in this edition. The format and content 
of the former entries on the Environment have been changed, and two new 
appendixes have been added--Appendix D: Abbreviations for Selected International 
Environmental Agreements and Appendix E:  Selected International Environmental 
Agreements. The name of Macedonia was changed to The Former Yugoslav Republic of 
Macedonia (FYROM). The gross domestic product (GDP) of most of the developing 
countries is now presented on a purchasing power parity (PPP) basis rather than 
on an exchange rate basis. The electronic files used to produce the Factbook 
have been restructured into a database. As a result, the formats of some entries 
in this edition have been changed. Additional changes will occur in the 1995 
Factbook.  

Abbreviations: (see Appendix B for abbreviations for international organizations 
and groups and Appendix D for abbreviations for international environmental 
agreements) 

avdp. -- avoirdupois 

c.i.f. -- cost, insurance, and freight 

CY -- calendar year 

DWT -- deadweight ton 

est. -- estimate 

Ex-Im -- Export-Import Bank of the United States 

f.o.b. -- free on board 

FRG -- Federal Republic of Germany (West Germany); used for information dated 
before 3 October 1990 or CY91 

FSU -- former Soviet Union 

FY -- fiscal year 

FYROM -- The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia 

GDP -- gross domestic product 

GDR -- German Democratic Republic (East Germany); used for information dated 
before 3 October 1990 or CY91 

GNP -- gross national product 

GRT -- gross register ton 

GWP -- gross world product 

km -- kilometer 

kW -- kilowatt 

kWh -- kilowatt hour 

m -- meter 

NA -- not available 

NEGL -- negligible 

nm -- nautical mile 

NZ -- New Zealand 

ODA -- official development assistance 

OOF -- other official flows 

PDRY -- People's Democratic Republic of Yemen [Yemen (Aden) or South Yemen]; 
used for information dated before 22 May 1990 or CY91 

sq km -- square kilometer 

sq mi -- square mile 

UAE -- United Arab Emirates 

UK -- United Kingdom 

US -- United States 

USSR -- Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (Soviet Union); used for information 
dated before 25 December 1991 

YAR -- Yemen Arab Republic [Yemen (Sanaa) or North Yemen]; used for information 
dated before 22 May 1990 or CY91 

Administrative divisions: The numbers, designatory terms, and first-order 
administrative divisions are generally those approved by the US Board on 
Geographic Names (BGN). Changes that have been reported but not yet acted on by 
BGN are noted. 

Area: Total area is the sum of all land and water areas delimited by 
international boundaries and/or coastlines. Land area is the aggregate of all 
surfaces delimited by international boundaries and/or coastlines, excluding 
inland water bodies (lakes, reservoirs, rivers). Comparative areas are based on 
total area equivalents. Most entities are compared with the entire US or one of 
the 50 states. The smaller entities are compared with Washington, DC (178 sq km, 
69 sq mi) or The Mall in Washington, DC (0.59 sq km, 0.23 sq mi, 146 acres). 

Birth rate: The average annual number of births during a year per 1,000 
population at midyear; also known as crude birth rate. 

Dates of information: In general, information available as of 1 January 1994 was 
used in the preparation of this edition. Population figures are estimates for 1 
July 1994, with population growth rates estimated for calendar year 1994. Major 
political events have been updated through May 1994. 

Death rate: The average annual number of deaths during a year per l,000 
population at midyear; also known as crude death rate. 

Digraphs: The digraph is a two-letter "country code" that precisely identifies 
every entity without overlap, duplication, or omission. AF, for example, is the 
digraph for Afghanistan. It is a standardized geopolitical data element 
promulgated in the  Federal Information Processing Standards Publication (FIPS) 
10-3 by the National Institute of Standards and Technology (US Department of 
Commerce) and maintained by the Office of the Geographer (US Department of 
State). The digraph is used to eliminate confusion and incompatibility in the 
collection, processing, and dissemination of area-specific data and is 
particularly useful for interchanging data between databases. 

Diplomatic representation: The US Government has diplomatic relations with 183 
nations, including 177 of the 184 UN members (excluded UN members are Bhutan, 
Cuba, Iran, Iraq, North Korea, Vietnam, and former Yugoslavia). In addition, the 
US has diplomatic relations with 6 nations that are not in the UN - Holy See, 
Kiribati, Nauru, Switzerland, Tonga, and Tuvalu. 

Economic aid: This entry refers to bilateral commitments of official development 
assistance (ODA) and other official flows (OOF). ODA is defined as financial 
assistance which is concessional in character, has the main objective to promote 
economic development and welfare of LDCs. and contains a grant element of at 
least 25%. OOF transactions are also official government assistance, but with a 
main objective other than development and with a grant element less than 25%. 
OOF transactions include official export credits (such as Ex-Im Bank credits), 
official equity and portfolio investment, and debt reorganization by the 
official sector that does not meet concessional terms. Aid is considered to have 
been committed when agreements are initialed by the parties involved and 
constitute a formal declaration of intent. 

Entities: Some of the nations, dependent areas, areas of special sovereignty, 
and governments included in this publication are not independent, and others are 
not officially recognized by the US Government. "Nation" refers to a people 
politically organized into a sovereign state with a definite territory. 
"Dependent area" refers to a broad category of political entities that are 
associated in some way with a nation. Names used for page headings are usually 
the short-form names as approved by the US Board on Geographic Names. There are 
266 entities in The World Factbook that may be categorized as follows: 

NATIONS 

183 -- UN members (excluding both the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia 
and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia; membership status in the UN is still to 
be determined) 

7 -- nations that are not members of the UN--Holy See, Kiribati, Nauru, Serbia 
and Montenegro, Switzerland, Tonga, Tuvalu 

OTHER 

1 -- Taiwan 

DEPENDENT AREAS 

6 -- Australia--Ashmore and Cartier Islands, Christmas Island, Cocos (Keeling) 
Islands, Coral Sea Islands, Heard Island and McDonald Islands, Norfolk Island 

2 -- Denmark--Faroe Islands, Greenland 

16 -- France--Bassas da India, Clipperton Island, Europa Island, French Guiana, 
French Polynesia, French Southern and Antarctic Lands, Glorioso Islands, 
Guadeloupe, Juan de Nova Island, Martinique, Mayotte, New Caledonia, Reunion, 
Saint Pierre and Miquelon, Tromelin Island, Wallis and Futuna 

2 -- Netherlands--Aruba, Netherlands Antilles 

3 -- New Zealand--Cook Islands, Niue, Tokelau 

3 -- Norway--Bouvet Island, Jan Mayen, Svalbard 

1 -- Portugal--Macau 

16 -- United Kingdom--Anguilla, Bermuda, British Indian Ocean Territory, British 
Virgin Islands, Cayman Islands, Falkland Islands, Gibraltar, Guernsey, Hong 
Kong, Jersey, Isle of Man, Montserrat, Pitcairn Islands, Saint Helena, South 
Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands, Turks and Caicos Islands 

15 -- United States--American Samoa, Baker Island, Guam, Howland Island, Jarvis 
Island, Johnston Atoll, Kingman Reef, Midway Islands, Navassa Island, Northern 
Mariana Islands, Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands (Palau), Palmyra Atoll, 
Puerto Rico, Virgin Islands, Wake Island 

MISCELLANEOUS 

6 -- Antarctica, Gaza Strip, Paracel Islands, Spratly Islands, West Bank, 
Western Sahara 

OTHER ENTITIES 

4 -- oceans--Arctic Ocean, Atlantic Ocean, Indian Ocean, Pacific Ocean 

1 -- World 

266 -- total 

Exchange rate: The value of a nation's monetary unit at a given date or over a 
given period of time, as expressed in units of local currency per US dollar and 
as determined by international market forces or official fiat. 

Gross domestic product (GDP): The value of all final goods and services produced 
within a nation in a given year. 

Gross national product (GNP): The value of all final goods and services produced 
within a nation in a given year, plus income earned abroad, minus income earned 
by foreigners from domestic production. 

Gross world product (GWP): The aggregate value of all goods and services 
produced worldwide in a given year. 

GNP/GDP methodology: In the "Economy" section, GNP/GDP dollar estimates for the 
great majority of countries are derived from purchasing power parity (PPP) 
calculations rather than from conversions at official currency exchange rates. 
The PPP method normally involves the use of international dollar price weights, 
which are applied to the quantities of goods and services produced in a given 
economy. In addition to the lack of reliable data from the majority of 
countries, the statistician faces a major difficulty in specifying, identifying, 
and allowing for the quality of goods and services. The division of a GNP/GDP 
estimate in local currency by the corresponding PPP estimate in dollars gives 
the PPP conversion rate. On average, one thousand dollars will buy the same 
market basket of goods in the US as one thousand dollars--converted to the local 
currency at the PPP conversion rate--will buy in the other country.  Whereas PPP 
estimates for OECD countries are quite reliable, PPP estimates for developing 
countries are often rough approximations.  The latter estimates are based on 
extrapolation of numbers published by the UN International Comparison Program 
and by Professors Robert Summers and Alan Heston of the University of 
Pennsylvania and their colleagues.  Because currency exchange rates depend on a 
variety of international and domestic financial forces that often have little 
relation to domestic output, use of these rates is less satisfactory for 
calculating GNP/GDP than the PPP method.  In developing countries with weak 
currencies the exchange rate estimate of GNP/GDP in dollars is typically one-
fourth to one-half the PPP estimate.  Furthermore, exchange rates may suddenly 
go up or down by 10% or more because of market forces or official fiat whereas 
real output has remained unchanged.  On 12 January 1994, for example, the 14 
countries of the African Financial Community (whose currencies are tied to the 
French franc) devalued their currencies by 50%.  This move, of course, did not 
cut the real output of these countries by half.  One additional caution: the 
proportion of, say, defense expenditures as a percent of GNP/GDP in local 
currency accounts may differ substantially from the proportion when GNP/GDP 
accounts are expressed in PPP terms, as, for example, when an observer estimates 
the dollar level of Russian or Japanese military expenditures; 

Growth rate (population): The annual percent change in the population, resulting 
from a surplus (or deficit) of births over deaths and the balance of migrants 
entering and leaving a country. The rate may be positive or negative. 

Illicit drugs: There are five categories of illicit drugs--narcotics, 
stimulants, depressants (sedatives), hallucinogens, and cannabis. These 
categories include many drugs legally produced and prescribed by doctors as well 
as those illegally produced and sold outside medical channels. 

Cannabis (Cannabis sativa) is the common hemp plant, which provides 
hallucinogens with some sedative properties, and includes marijuana (pot, 
Acapulco gold, grass, reefer), tetrahydrocannabinol (THC, Marinol), hashish 
(hash), and hashish oil (hash oil). 

Coca (Erythroxylon coca) is a bush, and the leaves contain the stimulant 
cocaine. Coca is not to be confused with cocoa, which comes from cacao seeds and 
is used in making chocolate, cocoa, and cocoa butter. 

Cocaine is a stimulant derived from the leaves of the coca bush. 

Depressants (sedatives) are drugs that reduce tension and anxiety and include 
chloral hydrate, barbiturates (Amytal, Nembutal, Seconal, phenobarbital), 
benzodiazepines (Librium, Valium), methaqualone (Quaalude), glutethimide 
(Doriden), and others (Equanil, Placidyl, Valmid). 

Drugs are any chemical substances that effect a physical, mental, emotional, or 
behavioral change in an individual. 

Drug abuse is the use of any licit or illicit chemical substance that results in 
physical, mental, emotional, or behavioral impairment in an individual. 

Hallucinogens are drugs that affect sensation, thinking, self-awareness, and 
emotion. Hallucinogens include LSD (acid, microdot), mescaline and peyote (mexc, 
buttons, cactus), amphetamine variants (PMA, STP, DOB), phencyclidine (PCP, 
angel dust, hog), phencyclidine analogues (PCE, PCPy, TCP), and others 
(psilocybin, psilocyn). 

Hashish is the resinous exudate of the cannabis or hemp plant (Cannabis sativa). 

Heroin is a semisynthetic derivative of morphine. 

Mandrax is a synthetic chemical depressant, the same as, or similar to Quaalude. 

Marijuana is the dried leaves of the cannabis or hemp plant (Cannabis sativa). 

Narcotics are drugs that relieve pain, often induce sleep, and refer to opium, 
opium derivatives, and synthetic substitutes. Natural narcotics include opium 
(paregoric, parepectolin), morphine (MS-Contin, Roxanol), codeine (Tylenol with 
codeine, Empirin with codeine, Robitussan AC), and thebaine. Semisynthetic 
narcotics include heroin (horse, smack), and hydromorphone (Dilaudid). Synthetic 
narcotics include meperidine or Pethidine (Demerol, Mepergan), methadone 
(Dolophine, Methadose), and others (Darvon, Lomotil). 

Opium is the milky exudate of the incised, unripe seedpod of the opium poppy. 

Opium poppy (Papaver somniferum) is the source for many natural and 
semisynthetic narcotics. 

Poppy straw concentrate is the alkaloid derived from the mature dried opium 
poppy. 

Qat (kat, khat) is a stimulant from the buds or leaves of catha edulis that is 
chewed or drunk as tea. 

Stimulants are drugs that relieve mild depression, increase energy and activity, 
and include cocaine (coke, snow, crack), amphetamines (Desoxyn, Dexedrine), 
phenmetrazine (Preludin), methylphenidate (Ritalin), and others (Cylert, 
Sanorex, Tenuate). 

Infant mortality rate: The number of deaths to infants under one year old in a 
given year per l,000 live births occurring in the same year. 

International disputes: This category includes a wide variety of situations that 
range from traditional bilateral boundary disputes to unilateral claims of one 
sort or another. Information regarding disputes over international boundaries 
and maritime boundaries has been reviewed by the Department of State. References 
to other situations involving borders or frontiers may also be included, such as 
resource disputes, geopolitical questions, or irredentist issues. However, 
inclusion does not necessarily constitute official acceptance or recognition by 
the US Government. 

Irrigated land: The figure refers to the land area that is artificially supplied 
with water. 

Land use: Human use of the land surface is categorized as arable land--land 
cultivated for crops that are replanted after each harvest (wheat, maize, rice);  
permanent crops--land cultivated for crops that are not replanted after each 
harvest (citrus, coffee, rubber);  meadows and pastures--land permanently used 
for herbaceous forage crops; forest and woodland--under dense or open stands of 
trees; and other--any land type not specifically mentioned above (urban areas, 
roads, desert). 

Leaders: The chief of state is the titular leader of the country who represents 
the state at official and ceremonial functions but is not involved with the day-
to-day activities of the government. The head of government is the 
administrative leader who manages the day-to-day activities of the government. 
In the UK, the monarch is the chief of state, and the Prime Minister is the head 
of government. In the US, the President is both the chief of state and the head 
of government. 

Life expectancy at birth: The average number of years to be lived by a group of 
people all born in the same year, if mortality at each age remains constant in 
the future. 

Literacy: There are no universal definitions and standards of literacy. Unless 
otherwise noted, all rates are based on the most common definition--the ability 
to read and write at a specified age. Detailing the standards that individual 
countries use to assess the ability to read and write is beyond the scope of 
this publication. 

Maritime claims: The proximity of neighboring states may prevent some national 
claims from being extended the full distance. 

Merchant marine: All ships engaged in the carriage of goods. All commercial 
vessels (as opposed to all nonmilitary ships), which excludes tugs, fishing 
vessels, offshore oil rigs, etc.; also, a grouping of merchant ships by 
nationality or register. 

Captive register--A register of ships maintained by a territory, possession, or 
colony primarily or exclusively for the use of ships owned in the parent 
country; also referred to as an offshore register, the offshore equivalent of an 
internal register. Ships on a captive register will fly the same flag as the 
parent country, or a local variant of it, but will be subject to the maritime 
laws and taxation rules of the offshore territory. Although the nature of a 
captive register makes it especially desirable for ships owned in the parent 
country, just as in the internal register, the ships may also be owned abroad. 
The captive register then acts as a flag of convenience register, except that it 
is not the register of an independent state. 

Flag of convenience register--A national register offering registration to a 
merchant ship not owned in the flag state. The major flags of convenience (FOC) 
attract ships to their register by virtue of low fees, low or nonexistent 
taxation of profits, and liberal manning requirements. True FOC registers are 
characterized by having relatively few of the ships registered actually owned in 
the flag state. Thus, while virtually any flag can be used for ships under a 
given set of circumstances, an FOC register is one where the majority of the 
merchant fleet is owned abroad. It is also referred to as an open register. 

Flag state--The nation in which a ship is registered and which holds legal 
jurisdiction over operation of the ship, whether at home or abroad. Differences 
in flag state maritime legislation determine how a ship is manned and taxed and 
whether a foreign-owned ship may be placed on the register. 

Internal register--A register of ships maintained as a subset of a national 
register. Ships on the internal register fly the national flag and have that 
nationality but are subject to a separate set of maritime rules from those on 
the main national register. These differences usually include lower taxation of 
profits, manning by foreign nationals, and, usually, ownership outside the flag 
state (when it functions as an FOC register). The Norwegian International Ship 
Register and Danish International Ship Register are the most notable examples of 
an internal register. Both have been instrumental in stemming flight from the 
national flag to flags of convenience and in attracting foreign owned ships to 
the Norwegian and Danish flags. 

Merchant ship--A vessel that carries goods against payment of freight; commonly 
used to denote any nonmilitary ship but accurately restricted to commercial 
vessels only. 

Register--The record of a ship's ownership and nationality as listed with the 
maritime authorities of a country; also, the compendium of such individual 
ships' registrations. Registration of a ship provides it with a nationality and 
makes it subject to the laws of the country in which registered (the flag state) 
regardless of the nationality of the ship's ultimate owner. 

Money figures: All money figures are expressed in contemporaneous US dollars 
unless otherwise indicated. 

National product: The total output of goods and services in a country in a given 
year. See Gross domestic product (GDP), Gross national product (GNP), and 
GNP/GDP methodology. 

Net migration rate: The balance between the number of persons entering and 
leaving a country during the year per 1,000 persons (based on midyear 
population). An excess of persons entering the country is referred to as net 
immigration (3.56 migrants/1,000 population); an excess of persons leaving the 
country as net emigration (-9.26 migrants/1,000 population). 

Population: Figures are estimates from the Bureau of the Census based on 
statistics from population censuses, vital statistics registration systems, or 
sample surveys pertaining to the recent past, and on assumptions about future 
trends. Starting with the 1993 Factbook demographic estimates for some countries 
(mostly African) have taken into account the effects of the growing incidence of 
AIDS infections; in 1993 these countries were Burkina, Burundi, Central African 
Republic, Congo, Cote d'Ivoire, Haiti, Kenya, Malawi, Rwanda, Tanzania, Uganda, 
Zaire, Zambia, Zimbabwe, Thailand, and Brazil.  

Total fertility rate: The average number of children that would be born per 
woman if all women lived to the end of their childbearing years and bore 
children according to a given fertility rate at each age. 

Years: All year references are for the calendar year (CY) unless indicated as 
fiscal year (FY). 

Note: Information for the US and US dependencies was compiled from material in 
the public domain and does not represent Intelligence Community estimates. The 
Handbook of International Economic Statistics, published annually in September 
by the Central Intelligence Agency, contains detailed economic information for 
the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) countries, 
Eastern Europe, the newly independent republics of the former nations of 
Yugoslavia and the Soviet Union, and selected other countries. The Handbook can 
be obtained wherever The World Factbook is available.


***THE WORLD FACTBOOK 1994


@Afghanistan, Geography

Location: 
  Southern Asia, between Iran and Pakistan
Map references: 
  Asia, Middle East, Standard Time Zones of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  647,500 sq km 
land area: 
  647,500 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly smaller than Texas
Land boundaries: 
  total 5,529 km, China 76 km, Iran 936 km, Pakistan 2,430 km,
  Tajikistan 1,206 km, Turkmenistan 744 km, Uzbekistan 137 km 
Coastline: 
  0 km (landlocked)
Maritime claims: 
  none; landlocked
International disputes: 
  periodic disputes with Iran over Helmand water rights; Iran supports
  clients in country, private Pakistani and Saudi sources also are
  active; power struggles among various groups for control of Kabul,
  regional rivalries among emerging warlords, traditional tribal
  disputes continue; support to Islamic fighters in Tajikistan's civil
  war; border dispute with Pakistan (Durand Line); support to Islamic
  militants worldwide by some factions
Climate: 
  arid to semiarid; cold winters and hot summers
Terrain: 
  mostly rugged mountains; plains in north and southwest
Natural resources: 
  natural gas, petroleum, coal, copper, talc, barites, sulphur, lead,
  zinc, iron ore, salt, precious and semiprecious stones 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  12% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  46% 
forest and woodland: 
  3% 
other: 
  39% 
Irrigated land: 
  26,600 sq km (1989 est.)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  soil degradation; overgrazing; deforestation (much of the remaining
  forests are being cut down for fuel and building materials);
  desertification
natural hazards: 
  damaging earthquakes occur in Hindu Kush mountains (one measured 6.8
  on the Richter scale in 1991); flooding
international agreements: 
  party to - Endangered Species, Environmental Modification, Marine
  Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban; signed, but not ratified - Biodiversity,
  Climate Change, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Life
  Conservation
Note: 
  landlocked

@Afghanistan, People

Population: 
  16,903,400 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  2.45% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  43.46 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  18.94 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  155.8 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  44.89 years 
male: 
  45.53 years 
female: 
  44.21 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  6.27 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Afghan(s) 
adjective: 
  Afghan 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Pashtun 38%, Tajik 25%, Uzbek 6%, Hazara 19%, minor ethnic groups
  (Chahar Aimaks, Turkmen, Baloch, and others)
Religions: 
  Sunni Muslim 84%, Shi'a Muslim 15%, other 1% 
Languages: 
  Pashtu 35%, Afghan Persian (Dari) 50%, Turkic languages (primarily
  Uzbek and Turkmen) 11%, 30 minor languages (primarily Balochi and
  Pashai) 4%, much bilingualism
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1990 est.)
total population: 
  29% 
male: 
  44% 
female: 
  14% 
Labor force: 
  4.98 million 
by occupation: 
  agriculture and animal husbandry 67.8%, industry 10.2%, construction
  6.3%, commerce 5.0%, services and other 10.7% (1980 est.)

@Afghanistan, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Islamic State of Afghanistan 
conventional short form: 
  Afghanistan 
local long form: 
  Dowlat-e Eslami-ye Afghanestan 
local short form: 
  Afghanestan 
former: 
  Republic of Afghanistan 
Digraph: 
  AF
Type: 
  transitional government 
Capital: 
  Kabul 
Administrative divisions: 
  30 provinces (velayat, singular - velayat); Badakhshan, Badghis,
  Baghlan, Balkh, Bamian, Farah, Faryab, Ghazni, Ghowr, Helmand, Herat,
  Jowzjan, Kabol, Kandahar, Kapisa, Konar, Kondoz, Laghman, Lowgar,
  Nangarhar, Nimruz, Oruzgan, Paktia, Paktika, Parvan, Samangan, Sar-e
  Pol, Takhar, Vardak, Zabol
note: 
  there may be a new province of Nurestan (Nuristan)
Independence: 
  19 August 1919 (from UK)
National holiday: 
  Victory of the Muslim Nation, 28 April; Remembrance Day for Martyrs
  and Disabled, 4 May; Independence Day, 19 August 
Constitution: 
  none
Legal system: 
  a new legal system has not been adopted but the transitional
  government has declared it will follow Islamic law (Shari'a)
Suffrage: 
  undetermined; previously universal, male ages 15-50
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  President Burhanuddin RABBANI (Interim President July - December 1992;
  President since 2 January 1993); First Vice President Mohammad NABI
  Mohammadi (since NA); First Vice President Mohammad SHAH Fazli (since
  NA); election last held NA December 1992 (next to be held NA December
  1994); results - Burhanuddin RABBANI was elected to a two-year term by
  a national shura, later amended by multi-party agreement to 18 months.
head of government: 
  Prime Minister Gulbuddin HIKMATYAR (since 17 March 1993); First Deputy
  Prime Minister Qutbuddin HELAL (since 17 March 1993); Deputy Prime
  Minister Arsala RAHMANI (since 17 March 1993) 
cabinet: 
  Council of Ministers 
Legislative branch: 
  a unicameral parliament consisting of 205 members was chosen by the
  shura in January 1993; non-functioning as of June 1993
Judicial branch: 
  an interim Chief Justice of the Supreme Court has been appointed, but
  a new court system has not yet been organized
Political parties and leaders: 
  current political organizations include Jamiat-i-Islami (Islamic
  Society), Burhanuddin RABBANI, Ahmad Shah MASOOD; Hizbi
  Islami-Gulbuddin (Islamic Party), Gulbuddin HIKMATYAR faction; Hizbi
  Islami-Khalis (Islamic Party), Yunis KHALIS faction; Ittihad-i-Islami
  Barai Azadi Afghanistan (Islamic Union for the Liberation of
  Afghanistan), Abdul Rasul SAYYAF; Harakat-Inqilab-i-Islami (Islamic
  Revolutionary Movement), Mohammad Nabi MOHAMMADI;
  Jabha-i-Najat-i-Milli Afghanistan (Afghanistan National Liberation
  Front), Sibghatullah MOJADDEDI; Mahaz-i-Milli-Islami (National Islamic
  Front), Sayed Ahamad GAILANI; Hizbi Wahdat (Islamic Unity Party),
  Abdul Ali MAZARI; Harakat-i-Islami (Islamic Movement), Mohammed Asif
  MOHSENI; Jumbesh-i-Milli Islami (National Islamic Movement), Rashid
  DOSTUM
note: 
  the former ruling Watan Party has been disbanded
Other political or pressure groups: 
  the former resistance commanders are the major power brokers in the
  countryside; shuras (councils) of commanders are now administering
  most cities outside Kabul; ulema (religious scholars); tribal elders
Member of: 
  AsDB, CP, ECO, ESCAP, FAO, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, IDA, IDB, IFAD,
  IFC, ILO, IMF, INTELSAT, IOC, ITU, LORCS, NAM, OIC, UN, UNCTAD,
  UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WFTU, WHO, WMO, WTO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  (vacant); Charge d'Affaires Abdul RAHIM 
chancery: 
  2341 Wyoming Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008 
telephone: 
  (202) 234-3770 or 3771 
FAX: 
  (202) 328-3516 
US diplomatic representation: 
  none; embassy was closed in January 1989
Flag: 
  three equal horizontal bands of green (top), white, and black, with
  the national coat of arms superimposed in the middle of the white band
  and large Islamic lettering superimposed over the green and white
  bands
Overview: 
  Afghanistan is an extremely poor, landlocked country, highly dependent
  on farming (wheat especially) and livestock raising (sheep and goats).
  Economic considerations have played second fiddle to political and
  military upheavals during more than 14 years of war, including the
  nearly 10-year Soviet military occupation (which ended 15 February
  1989). Over the past decade, one-third of the population fled the
  country, with Pakistan sheltering more than 3 million refugees and
  Iran about 3 million. About 1.4 million Afghan refugees remain in
  Pakistan and about 2 million in Iran. Another 1 million probably moved
  into and around urban areas within Afghanistan. Although reliable data
  are unavailable, gross domestic product is lower than 12 years ago
  because of the loss of labor and capital and the disruption of trade
  and transport.
National product: 
  GDP $NA
National product real growth rate: 
  NA%
National product per capita: 
  $NA
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  NA%
Unemployment rate: 
  NA%
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $NA
expenditures: 
  $NA, including capital expenditures of $NA
Exports: 
  $243 million (f.o.b., 1991)
commodities: 
  fruits and nuts, handwoven carpets, wool, cotton, hides and pelts,
  precious and semi-precious gems
partners: 
  FSU countries, Pakistan, Iran, Germany, India, UK, Belgium,
  Luxembourg, Czechoslovakia
Imports: 
  $737 million (c.i.f., 1991)
commodities: 
  food and petroleum products; most consumer goods
partners: 
  FSU countries, Pakistan, Iran, Japan, Singapore, India, South Korea,
  Germany
External debt: 
  $2.3 billion (March 1991 est.)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate 2.3% (FY91 est.); accounts for about 25% of GDP
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  480,000 kW
production: 
  1 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  60 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  small-scale production of textiles, soap, furniture, shoes,
  fertilizer, and cement; handwoven carpets; natural gas, oil, coal,
  copper
Agriculture: 
  largely subsistence farming and nomadic animal husbandry; cash
  products - wheat, fruits, nuts, karakul pelts, wool, mutton
Illicit drugs: 
  an illicit cultivator of opium poppy and cannabis for the
  international drug trade; world's second-largest opium producer after
  Burma (680 metric tons in 1993) and a major source of hashish
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  $450 million US assistance provided 1985-1993; USAID will stop all
  programs by mid-1994; the UN provides assistance in the form of food
  aid, immunization, land mine removal, and a wide range of aid to
  refugees and displaced persons
Currency: 
  1 afghani (AF) = 100 puls
Exchange rates: 
  afghanis (Af) per US$1 - 1,900 (January 1994), 1,019 (March 1993), 850
  (1991), 700 (1989-90), 220 (1988-89); note - these rates reflect the
  free market exchange rates rather than the official exchange rates
Fiscal year: 
  21 March - 20 March

@Afghanistan, Communications

Railroads: 
  9.6 km (single track) 1.524-meter gauge from Gushgy (formerly Kushka)
  (Turkmenistan) to Towraghondi and 15.0 km from Termiz (Uzbekistan) to
  Kheyrabad transshipment point on south bank of Amu Darya
Highways: 
total: 
  21,000 km 
paved: 
  2,800 km 
unpaved: 
  gravel 1,650 km; earth 16,550 km (1984)
Inland waterways: 
  total navigability 1,200 km; chiefly Amu Darya, which handles vessels
  up to about 500 metric tons
Pipelines: 
  petroleum products - Uzbekistan to Bagram and Turkmenistan to
  Shindand; natural gas 180 km 
Ports: 
  Shir Khan and Kheyrabad (river ports)
Airports: 
total: 
  42 
usable: 
  35 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  9 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  10 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  17 
Telecommunications: 
  limited telephone, telegraph, and radiobroadcast services; television
  introduced in 1980; 31,200 telephones; numerous cellular telephones;
  broadcast stations - 5 AM, no FM, 1 TV; 1 satellite earth station

@Afghanistan, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  the military still does not yet exist on a national scale; some
  elements of the former Army, Air and Air Defense Forces, National
  Guard, Border Guard Forces, National Police Force (Sarandoi), and
  tribal militias remain intact but are factionalized among the various
  mujahedin and former regime leaders
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 4,188,036; fit for military service 2,245,196; reach
  military age (22) annually 158,335 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  the new government has not yet adopted a defense budget


@Albania, Geography

Location: 
  Balkan State, Southeastern Europe, on the Balkan Peninsula between
  Serbia and Montenegro and Greece
Map references: 
  Africa, Ethnic Groups in Eastern Europe, Europe, Standard Time Zones
  of the World 
Area: 
total area: 
  28,750 sq km 
land area: 
  27,400 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly larger than Maryland
Land boundaries: 
  total 720 km, Greece 282 km, The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
  151 km, Serbia and Montenegro 287 km (114 km with Serbia, 173 km with
  Montenegro)
Coastline: 
  362 km 
Maritime claims: 
continental shelf: 
  not specified
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  Albanian majority in Kosovo seeks independence from Serbia and
  Montenegro, and the Albanian Government supports the Kosovo position
  politically
Climate: 
  mild temperate; cool, cloudy, wet winters; hot, clear, dry summers;
  interior is cooler and wetter
Terrain: 
  mostly mountains and hills; small plains along coast
Natural resources: 
  petroleum, natural gas, coal, chromium, copper, timber, nickel 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  21% 
permanent crops: 
  4% 
meadows and pastures: 
  15% 
forest and woodland: 
  38% 
other: 
  22% 
Irrigated land: 
  4,230 sq km (1989)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  deforestation
natural hazards: 
  subject to destructive earthquakes; tsunami occur along southwestern
  coast
international agreements: 
  party to - Biodiversity
Note: 
  strategic location along Strait of Otranto (links Adriatic Sea to
  Ionian Sea and Mediterranean Sea)

@Albania, People

Population: 
  3,374,085 (July 1994 est.) 
note: 
  IMF, working with Albanian government figures estimates the population
  at 3,120,000 in 1993 and that the population has fallen since 1990
Population growth rate: 
  1.19% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  22.46 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  5.32 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  -5.27 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  30 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  73.4 years 
male: 
  70.42 years 
female: 
  76.61 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  2.78 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Albanian(s) 
adjective: 
  Albanian 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Albanian 95%, Greeks 3%, other 2% (Vlachs, Gypsies, Serbs, and
  Bulgarians) (1989 est.)
Religions: 
  Muslim 70%, Greek Orthodox 20%, Roman Catholic 10% 
note: 
  all mosques and churches were closed in 1967 and religious observances
  prohibited; in November 1990, Albania began allowing private religious
  practice
Languages: 
  Albanian (Tosk is the official dialect), Greek 
Literacy: 
  age 9 and over can read and write (1955)
total population: 
  72% 
male: 
  80% 
female: 
  63% 
Labor force: 
  1.5 million (1987)
by occupation: 
  agriculture 60%, industry and commerce 40% (1986)

@Albania, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Republic of Albania 
conventional short form: 
  Albania 
local long form: 
  Republika e Shqiperise 
local short form: 
  Shqiperia 
former: 
  People's Socialist Republic of Albania 
Digraph: 
  AL
Type: 
  nascent democracy 
Capital: 
  Tirane 
Administrative divisions: 
  26 districts (rrethe, singular - rreth); Berat, Dibre, Durres,
  Elbasan, Fier, Gjirokaster, Gramsh, Kolonje, Korce, Kruje, Kukes,
  Lezhe, Librazhd, Lushnje, Mat, Mirdite, Permet, Pogradec, Puke,
  Sarande, Shkoder, Skrapar, Tepelene, Tirane, Tropoje, Vlore
Independence: 
  28 November 1912 (from Ottoman Empire)
National holiday: 
  Liberation Day, 28 November (1944; changed by decree on 12 November
  1993)
Constitution: 
  an interim basic law was approved by the People's Assembly on 29 April
  1991; a new constitution was to be drafted for adoption in 1992, but
  is still in process
Legal system: 
  has not accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age, universal and compulsory
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  President of the Republic Sali BERISHA (since 9 April 1992) 
head of government: 
  Prime Minister of the Council of Ministers Aleksander Gabriel MEKSI
  (since 10 April 1992) 
Cabinet: 
  Council of Ministers; appointed by the president
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
People's Assembly (Kuvendi Popullor): 
  elections last held 22 March 1992; results - DP 62.29%, ASP 25.57%,
  SDP 4.33%, RP 3.15%, UHP 2.92%, other 1.74%; seats - (140 total) DP
  92, ASP 38, SDP 7, RP 1, UHP 2
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court 
Political parties and leaders: 
  there are at least 18 political parties; most prominent are the
  Albanian Socialist Party (ASP; formerly the Albania Workers Party),
  Fatos NANO, first secretary; Democratic Party (DP), Eduard SELAMI,
  chairman; Albanian Republican Party (RP), Sabri GODO; Omonia (Greek
  minority party), leader NA (ran in 1992 election as Unity for Human
  Rights Party (UHP)); Social Democratic Party (SDP), Skender GJINUSHI;
  Democratic Alliance Party (DAP), Spartak NGJELA, chairman
Member of: 
  BSEC, CCC, CE (guest), CSCE, EBRD, ECE, FAO, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, IDA,
  IDB, IFAD, IFC, ILO, IMF, IMO, INTELSAT (nonsignatory user), INTERPOL,
  IOC, IOM (observer), ISO, ITU, LORCS, NACC, OIC, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO,
  UNIDO, UPU, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Lublin Hasan DILJA 
chancery: 
  Suite 1010, 1511 K Street NW, Washington, DC 20005 
telephone: 
  (202) 223-4942, 8187 
FAX: 
  (202) 628-7342 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador William E. RYERSON 
embassy: 
  Rruga E. Elbansanit 103, Tirane 
mailing address: 
  PSC 59, Box 100 (A), APO AE 09624 
telephone: 
  355-42-32875, 33520 
FAX: 
  355-42-32222 
Flag: 
  red with a black two-headed eagle in the center

@Albania, Economy
Overview: 
  An extremely poor country by European standards, Albania is making the
  difficult transition to a more open-market economy. The economy
  rebounded in 1993 after a severe depression accompanying the collapse
  of the previous centrally planned system in 1990 and 1991.
  Stabilization policies, including public sector layoffs and reduced
  social services, have improved the government's fiscal situation and
  reduced inflation. The recovery was spurred by the remittances of some
  5% of the population which works abroad, mostly in Greece and Italy.
  Foreign assistance and humanitarian aid also supported the recovery.
  Most agricultural land was privatized in 1992, substantially improving
  peasant incomes. Albania's limited industrial sector, now less than
  one-sixth of GDP, continued to decline in 1993. A sharp fall in
  chromium prices reduced hard currency receipts from the mining sector.
  Large segments of the population, especially those living in urban
  areas, continue to depend on humanitarian aid to meet basic food
  requirements. Unemployment remains a severe problem accounting for
  approximately one-fifth of the work force. Growth is expected to
  continue in 1994, but could falter if Albania becomes involved in the
  conflict in the former Yugoslavia, workers' remittances from Greece
  are reduced, or foreign assistance declines.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $3.3 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  11% (1993)
National product per capita: 
  $1,100 (1993 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  31% (1993 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  18% (1993 est.)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $1.1 billion 
expenditures: 
  $1.4 billion, including capital expenditures of $70 million (1991
  est.)
Exports: 
  $70 million (f.o.b., 1992)
commodities: 
  asphalt, metals and metallic ores, electricity, crude oil, vegetables,
  fruits, tobacco
partners: 
  Italy, The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Germany, Greece,
  Czechoslovakia, Poland, Romania, Bulgaria, Hungary
Imports: 
  $524 million (f.o.b., 1992)
commodities: 
  machinery, consumer goods, grains
partners: 
  Italy, The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Germany,
  Czechoslovakia, Romania, Poland, Hungary, Bulgaria, Greece
External debt: 
  $724 million (1993 est.)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate -10% (1993 est.); accounts for 16% of GDP (1993 est.)
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  1,690,000 kW
production: 
  5 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  1,520 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  food processing, textiles and clothing, lumber, oil, cement,
  chemicals, mining, basic metals, hydropower
Agriculture: 
  accounts for 55% of GDP; arable land per capita among lowest in
  Europe; 80% of arable land now in private hands; one-half of work
  force engaged in farming; produces wide range of temperate-zone crops
  and livestock
Illicit drugs: 
  transshipment point for Southwest Asian heroin transiting the Balkan
  route; limited opium production
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  $190 million humanitarian aid; $94 million in loans/guarantees/credits
Currency: 
  1 lek (L) = 100 qintars
Exchange rates: 
  leke (L) per US$1 - 99 (January 1994), 97 (January 1993), 50 (January
  1992), 25 (September 1991)
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Albania, Communications

Railroads: 
  543 km total; 509 km 1.435-meter standard gauge, single track and 34
  km narrow gauge, single track (1990); line connecting Titograd (Serbia
  and Montenegro) and Shkoder (Albania) completed August 1986
Highways: 
total: 
  16,700 km 
paved: 
  6,700 km 
unpaved: 
  earth 10,000 km (1990)
Inland waterways: 
  43 km plus Albanian sections of Lake Scutari, Lake Ohrid, and Lake
  Prespa (1990)
Pipelines: 
  crude oil 145 km; petroleum products 55 km; natural gas 64 km (1991)
Ports: 
  Durres, Sarande, Vlore
Merchant marine: 
  11 cargo ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 52,967 GRT/76,887 DWT
Airports: 
total: 
  12 
usable: 
  10 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  3 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  0 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  6 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  4 
Telecommunications: 
  inadequate service; 15,000 telephones; broadcast stations - 13 AM, 1
  TV; 514,000 radios, 255,000 TVs (1987 est.)

@Albania, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  Army, Navy, Air and Air Defense Forces, Interior Ministry Troops 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 906,938; fit for military service 746,945; reach
  military age (19) annually 33,184 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  215 million leke, NA% of GNP (1993 est.); note - conversion of defense
  expenditures into US dollars using the current exchange rate could
  produce misleading results


@Algeria, Geography

Location: 
  Northern Africa, along the Mediterranean Sea, between Morocco and
  Tunisia
Map references: 
  Africa, Europe 
Area: 
total area: 
  2,381,740 sq km 
land area: 
  2,381,740 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly less than 3.5 times the size of Texas
Land boundaries: 
  total 6,343 km, Libya 982 km, Mali 1,376 km, Mauritania 463 km,
  Morocco 1,559 km, Niger 956 km, Tunisia 965 km, Western Sahara 42 km 
Coastline: 
  998 km 
Maritime claims: 
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  Libya claims part of southeastern Algeria; land boundary dispute with
  Tunisia settled in 1993
Climate: 
  arid to semiarid; mild, wet winters with hot, dry summers along coast;
  drier with cold winters and hot summers on high plateau; sirocco is a
  hot, dust/sand-laden wind especially common in summer
Terrain: 
  mostly high plateau and desert; some mountains; narrow, discontinuous
  coastal plain
Natural resources: 
  petroleum, natural gas, iron ore, phosphates, uranium, lead, zinc 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  3% 
permanent crops: 
  0% 
meadows and pastures: 
  13% 
forest and woodland: 
  2% 
other: 
  82% 
Irrigated land: 
  3,360 sq km (1989 est.)
Environment: 
current issues: 
  soil erosion from overgrazing and other poor farming practices;
  desertification; dumping of untreated sewage, petroleum refining
  wastes, and other industrial effluents is leading to the pollution of
  rivers and coastal waters; Mediterranean Sea, in particular, becoming
  polluted from oil wastes, soil erosion, and fertilizer runoff; limited
  supply of potable water
natural hazards: 
  mountainous areas subject to severe earthquakes
international agreements: 
  party to - Climate Change, Endangered Species, Environmental
  Modification, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Wetlands;
  signed, but not ratified - Biodiversity, Law of the Sea, Nuclear Test
  Ban
Note: 
  second-largest country in Africa (after Sudan)

@Algeria, People

Population: 
  27,895,068 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  2.29% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  29.71 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  6.22 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  -0.58 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  52.1 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
total population: 
  67.68 years 
male: 
  66.63 years 
female: 
  68.77 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  3.83 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 
  Algerian(s) 
adjective: 
  Algerian 
Ethnic divisions: 
  Arab-Berber 99%, European less than 1%
Religions: 
  Sunni Muslim (state religion) 99%, Christian and Jewish 1% 
Languages: 
  Arabic (official), French, Berber dialects 
Literacy: 
  age 15 and over can read and write (1990 est.)
total population: 
  57% 
male: 
  70% 
female: 
  46% 
Labor force: 
  6.2 million (1992 est.)
by occupation: 
  government 29.5%, agriculture 22%, construction and public works
  16.2%, industry 13.6%, commerce and services 13.5%, transportation and
  communication 5.2% (1989)

@Algeria, Government

Names: 
conventional long form: 
  Democratic and Popular Republic of Algeria 
conventional short form: 
  Algeria 
local long form: 
  Al Jumhuriyah al Jaza'iriyah ad Dimuqratiyah ash Shabiyah 
local short form: 
  Al Jaza'ir 
Digraph: 
  AG
Type: 
  republic 
Capital: 
  Algiers 
Administrative divisions: 
  48 provinces (wilayast, singular - wilaya); Adrar, Ain Defla, Ain
  Temouchent, Alger, Annaba, Batna, Bechar, Bejaia, Biskra, Blida, Bordj
  Bou Arreridj, Bouira, Boumerdes, Chlef, Constantine, Djelfa, El
  Bayadh, El Oued, El Tarf, Ghardaia, Guelma, Illizi, Jijel, Khenchela,
  Laghouat, Mascara, Medea, Mila, Mostaganem, M'Sila, Naama, Oran,
  Ouargla, Oum el Bouaghi, Relizane, Saida, Setif, Sidi Bel Abbes,
  Skikda, Souk Ahras, Tamanghasset, Tebessa, Tiaret, Tindouf, Tipaza,
  Tissemsilt, Tizi Ouzou, Tlemcen
Independence: 
  5 July 1962 (from France)
National holiday: 
  Anniversary of the Revolution, 1 November (1954) 
Constitution: 
  19 November 1976, effective 22 November 1976; revised 3 November 1988
  and 23 February 1989
Legal system: 
  socialist, based on French and Islamic law; judicial review of
  legislative acts in ad hoc Constitutional Council composed of various
  public officials, including several Supreme Court justices; has not
  accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction
Suffrage: 
  18 years of age; universal
Executive branch: 
chief of state: 
  President Lamine ZEROUAL (since 31 January 1994); next election to be
  held after a three-year transition period which began on 31 January
  1994 
head of government: 
  Prime Minister Mokdad SIFI (since 11 April 1994) 
cabinet: 
  Council of Ministers; appointed by the prime minister
Legislative branch: 
  unicameral
National People's Assembly (Al-Majlis Ech-Chaabi Al-Watani):
  elections first round held on 26 December 1991 (second round canceled
  by the military after President BENDJEDID resigned 11 January 1992,
  effectively suspending the Assembly); results - percent of vote by
  party NA; seats - (281 total); the fundamentalist FIS won 188 of the
  231 seats contested in the first round; note - elections (municipal
  and wilaya) were held in June 1990, the first in Algerian history;
  results - FIS 55%, FLN 27.5%, other 17.5%, with 65% of the voters
  participating
Judicial branch: 
  Supreme Court (Cour Supreme) 
Political parties and leaders: 
  Islamic Salvation Front (FIS, outlawed April 1992), Ali BELHADJ, Dr.
  Abassi MADANI, Abdelkader HACHANI (all under arrest), Rabeh KEBIR
  (self-exile in Germany); National Liberation Front (FLN), Abdelhamid
  MEHRI, Secretary General; Socialist Forces Front (FFS), Hocine Ait
  AHMED, Secretary General
note: 
  the government established a multiparty system in September 1989 and,
  as of 31 December 1990, over 50 legal parties existed
Member of: 
  ABEDA, AfDB, AFESD, AL, AMF, AMU, CCC, ECA, FAO, G-15, G-19, G-24,
  G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, IDA, IDB, IFAD, IFC, ILO, IMF, IMO, INMARSAT,
  INTELSAT, INTERPOL, IOC, ISO, ITU, LORCS, NAM, OAPEC, OAS (observer),
  OAU, OIC, OPEC, UN, UNAVEM II, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO, UNTAC,
  UPU, WCL, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTO 
Diplomatic representation in US: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Nourredine Yazid ZERHOUNI 
chancery: 
  2118 Kalorama Road NW, Washington, DC 20008 
telephone: 
  (202) 265-2800 
US diplomatic representation: 
chief of mission: 
  Ambassador Mary Ann CASEY 
embassy: 
  4 Chemin Cheikh Bachir El-Ibrahimi, Algiers 
mailing address: 
  B. P. Box 549, Alger-Gare, 16000 Algiers 
telephone: 
  [213] (2) 601-425, 255, 186 
FAX: 
  [213] (2) 603979 
consulate(s): 
  Oran 
Flag: 
  two equal vertical bands of green (hoist side) and white with a red
  five-pointed star within a red crescent; the crescent, star, and color
  green are traditional symbols of Islam (the state religion)

@Algeria, Economy

Overview: 
  The hydrocarbons sector is the backbone of the economy, accounting for
  roughly 57% of government revenues, 25% of GDP, and almost all export
  earnings; Algeria has the fifth largest reserves of natural gas in the
  world and ranks fourteenth for oil. Algiers' efforts to reform one of
  the most centrally planned economies in the Arab world began after the
  1986 collapse of world oil prices plunged the country into a severe
  recession. In 1989, the government launched a comprehensive,
  IMF-supported program to achieve macroeconomic stabilization and to
  introduce market mechanisms into the economy. Despite substantial
  progress toward macroeconomic adjustment, in 1992 the reform drive
  stalled as Algiers became embroiled in political turmoil. In September
  1993, a new government was formed, one of whose priorities was the
  resumption and acceleration of the structural adjustment process.
  Buffeted by the slump in world oil prices and burdened with a heavy
  foreign debt, Algiers in 1993 resumed negotiations with the IMF and is
  on track to conclude a standby arrangement with the Fund in 1994.
National product: 
  GDP - purchasing power equivalent - $89 billion (1993 est.)
National product real growth rate: 
  1% (1993 est.)
National product per capita: 
  $3,300 (1992 est.)
Inflation rate (consumer prices): 
  22% (1993 est.)
Unemployment rate: 
  22% (1993 est.)
Budget: 
revenues: 
  $14.4 billion 
expenditures: 
  $14.6 billion, including capital expenditures of $3.5 billion (1992
  est.)
Exports: 
  $11.4 billion (f.o.b., 1993 est.)
commodities: 
  petroleum and natural gas 97%
partners: 
  Italy 21%, France 16%, US 14%, Germany 13%, Spain 9%
Imports: 
  $9 billion (f.o.b., 1993 est.)
commodities: 
  capital goods 39.7%, food and beverages 21.7%, consumer goods 11.8%
  (1990)
partners: 
  France 29%, Italy 14%, Spain 9%, US 9%, Germany 7%
External debt: 
  $26 billion (1994)
Industrial production: 
  growth rate NA%
Electricity: 
capacity: 
  6,380,000 kW
production: 
  16.384 billion kWh 
consumption per capita: 
  630 kWh (1992)
Industries: 
  petroleum, light industries, natural gas, mining, electrical,
  petrochemical, food processing
Agriculture: 
  accounts for 12.8% of GDP (1993 est.) and employs 22% of labor force;
  products- wheat, barley, oats, grapes, olives, citrus, fruits, sheep,
  cattle; net importer of food - grain, vegetable oil, sugar
Economic aid: 
recipient: 
  US commitments, including Ex-Im (FY70-85), $1.4 billion; Western
  (non-US) countries, ODA and OOF bilateral commitments (1970-89), $925
  million; OPEC bilateral aid (1979-89), $1.8 billion; Communist
  countries (1970-89), $2.7 billion; net official disbursements
  (1985-89), $375 million 
Currency: 
  1 Algerian dinar (DA) = 100 centimes
Exchange rates: 
  Algerian dinars (DA) per US$1 - 36.008 (April 1994), 23.345 (1993),
  21.836 (1992), 18.473 (1991), 8.958 (1990), 7.6086 (1989)
Fiscal year: 
  calendar year

@Algeria, Communications

Railroads: 
  4,060 km total; 2,616 km standard gauge (1.435 m), 1,188 km
  1.055-meter gauge, 256 km 1.000-meter gauge; 300 km electrified; 215
  km double track
Highways: 
total: 
  90,031 km 
paved: 
  concrete, bituminous 58,868 km 
unpaved: 
  gravel, crushed stone, earth 31,163 km (1990)
Pipelines: 
  crude oil 6,612 km; petroleum products 298 km; natural gas 2,948 km 
Ports: 
  Algiers, Annaba, Arzew, Bejaia, Djendjene, Ghazaouet, Jijel, Mers el
  Kebir, Mostaganem, Oran, Skikda
Merchant marine: 
  75 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 903,179 GRT/1,064,211 DWT, bulk
  9, cargo 27, chemical tanker 7, liquefied gas 9, oil tanker 5,
  roll-on/roll-off cargo 12, short-sea passenger 5, specialized tanker 1
Airports: 
total: 
  140 
usable: 
  124 
with permanent-surface runways: 
  53 
with runways over 3,659 m: 
  2 
with runways 2,440-3,659 m: 
  32 
with runways 1,220-2,439 m: 
  65 
Telecommunications: 
  excellent domestic and international service in the north, sparse in
  the south; 822,000 telephones; broadcast stations - 26 AM, no FM, 18
  TV; 1,600,000 TV sets; 5,200,000 radios; 5 submarine cables; microwave
  radio relay to Italy, France, Spain, Morocco, and Tunisia; coaxial
  cable to Morocco and Tunisia; satellite earth stations - 1 Atlantic
  Ocean INTELSAT, 1 Indian Ocean INTELSAT, 1 Intersputnik, l ARABSAT,
  and 12 domestic; 20 additional satellite earth stations are planned

@Algeria, Defense Forces

Branches: 
  National Popular Army, Navy, Air Force, Territorial Air Defense 
Manpower availability: 
  males age 15-49 6,863,378; fit for military service 4,215,767; reach
  military age (19) annually 301,945 (1994 est.)
Defense expenditures: 
  exchange rate conversion - $1.36 billion, 2.5% of GDP (1993 est.)


@American Samoa

Header

Affiliation: 
  (territory of the US) 

@American Samoa, Geography

Location: 
  Oceania, Polynesia, in the South Pacific Ocean, 3,700 km
  south-southwest of Honolulu, about halfway between Hawaii and New
  Zealand
Map references: 
  Oceania 
Area: 
total area: 
  199 sq km 
land area: 
  199 sq km 
comparative area: 
  slightly larger than Washington, DC
note: 
  includes Rose Island and Swains Island
Land boundaries: 
  0 km 
Coastline: 
  116 km 
Maritime claims: 
contiguous zone: 
  24 nm
continental shelf: 
  200-m depth or to depth of exploitation
exclusive economic zone: 
  200 nm
territorial sea: 
  12 nm
International disputes: 
  none
Climate: 
  tropical marine, moderated by southeast trade winds; annual rainfall
  averages 124 inches; rainy season from November to April, dry season
  from May to October; little seasonal temperature variation
Terrain: 
  five volcanic islands with rugged peaks and limited coastal plains,
  two coral atolls (Rose Island, Swains Island)
Natural resources: 
  pumice, pumicite 
Land use: 
arable land: 
  10% 
permanent crops: 
  5% 
meadows and pastures: 
  0% 
forest and woodland: 
  75% 
other: 
  10% 
Irrigated land: 
  NA sq km 
Environment: 
rent issues: 
     NA 
ural hazards: 
     typhoons common from December to March
ernational agreements: 
     NA 
Note: 
  Pago Pago has one of the best natural deepwater harbors in the South
  Pacific Ocean, sheltered by shape from rough seas and protected by
  peripheral mountains from high winds; strategic location in the South
  Pacific Ocean

@American Samoa, People

Population: 
  55,223 (July 1994 est.) 
Population growth rate: 
  3.86% (1994 est.) 
Birth rate: 
  36.63 births/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Death rate: 
  4.01 deaths/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Net migration rate: 
  6 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1994 est.) 
Infant mortality rate: 
  18.78 deaths/1,000 live births (1994 est.) 
Life expectancy at birth: 
Total population: 
  72.91 years 
male: 
  71.03 years 
female: 
  74.85 years (1994 est.)
Total fertility rate: 
  4.36 children born/woman (1994 est.) 
Nationality: 
noun: 

Back to Full Books