All Saints' Day and Other SermonsbyCharles Kingsley

brought in contact with women of that class, of whom I shall only say, 
that if they were not meant for some such noble work as this--and not for 
mere pleasure and mere display, then for what purpose, in heaven or 
earth, were they made? and why has Providence taken the trouble (as it 
were) to elaborate, by long ages of civilization, that most exquisite of 
all products of nature and of art--A Lady?

Ah! what the ladies of England might do, and that without interfering in 
the least with their duties as wives and mothers, if they would work 
together, as a class!  If they would work as well and humanly while they 
are in towns, as most of them do work while they are in the country; as 
some of them do, to their honour, in the towns already!  But how many? 
what proportion do those who do good bear to those who do nothing?  What 
a small amount of humanizing and civilizing intercourse with some women 
of the labouring class is there in the case of the wives of rich men who 
come up to town, merely for the season, and forget that it is their 
temporary and uncertain stay in London which causes much of the temporary 
and uncertain employment of the London poor, and their consequent 
temptation to unthrift and recklessness!  How little humanizing and 
civilizing intercourse with the poor is carried on by the wives of those 
employers of labour who surely, surely owe something more to their 
husband's work people, than to be aware (by hearsay) that they are duly 
paid every Saturday night?

But I shall be told:  We need not fear--we can justify ourselves before 
God and man.  I shall be reminded of all that has been done, and done 
well too, for the poor during the last generation, and bidden not to 
calumniate my countrymen.  True, much has been done; and done well.  And 
true also it is that no effort to make the rich and poor meet together, 
to bring the different classes of society into contact with each other, 
but has succeeded--has sown good seed--which I trust may bring forth good 
fruit in the day when every tree shall be judged by its fruit.  The 
events of 1830, startling and warning, and those of 1848, more pregnant, 
if possible, with warning than the former, awakened a spirit of humanity 
in England, which was also a spirit of prudence and of common sense.

But I cannot conceal from myself, or you, that the earnestness which was 
awakened in those days is dying out in these.  The richer classes of 
every country are tempted from time to time to fits of laziness--fits of 
frivolity and luxury, surfeits, in which men say, with a shrug and a 
yawn--"Why be very much in earnest?  Why take so much trouble?  Somebody 
must always be rich, why should not I?  Somebody must enjoy the money, 
why should not I?  At all events, things will last my time."  And that 
such a surfeit has fallen upon the rich of this land, is a fact; for that 
this is the tone of to-day, and that the tone increases, none can deny 
who knows that which calls itself the WORLD, and calls itself so only too 
truly; the world of which it is written, that all that is in the world--
the lust of the flesh, and the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life--
is not of the Father, but of the world.  And the world passeth away, and 
the lust thereof.  But he who doeth the will of God, he alone abideth for 
ever.

God grant that we, who have just seen the most cunningly organized and 
daintily bedizened specimen of a world, which ever flaunted on the earth 
since men began to build their towers of Babel, collapse and crumble at a 
single blow, may take God's hint, that the fashion of this world passeth 
away.  Let the idle, the frivolous, the sensual, and those who, like 
Figaro's Marquis, have earned all earthly happiness by only taking the 
trouble to be born--let them look back on this last awful Christmas-tide, 
and hear, speaking in fact unmistakeable, the voice of the Lord.  Think 
ye that they whose blood Pilate mingled with their sacrifices were 
sinners above all the Galilaeans, because they suffered such things?  I 
tell you, "Nay:  but except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish."

There are those who will hear such words with a smile, even with a sneer, 
and say, Such wholesale judgments of God, even granting that there are 
such things, are, after all, very rare:  it is very seldom that a whole 
class, a whole system of society, is punished in mass--and why then need 
we trouble ourselves about so remote a probability?

Then know this--that as surely as God sometimes punishes wholesale, so 
surely is He always punishing in detail.  By that infinite concatenation 
of moral causes and effects, which makes the whole world one mass of 
special Providences, every sin of ours will punish itself, and probably 
punish itself in kind.  Are we selfish?  We shall call out selfishness in 
others.  Do we neglect our duty?  Then others will neglect their duty to 
us.  Do we indulge our passions?  Then others, who depend on us, will 
indulge theirs, to our detriment and misery.  Do we squander our money?  
Then our children and our servants will squander our money for us.

Do we?--but what use to go on reminding men of truths which no one 
believes, because they are too painful and searching to be believed in 
comfort?  What use to tell men what they never will confess to be true--
that by every crime, folly, even neglect of theirs, they drive a thorn 
into their own flesh, which will trouble them for years to come, it may 
be to their dying day?  And yet so it is.


Though the mills of God grind slowly, yet they grind exceeding small;
Though with patience He stands waiting, with exactness grinds He all.


As those who neglect their fellow-creatures will discover, by the most 
patent undeniable proofs, in that last great day, when the rich and poor 
shall meet together, and then, at least, discover that the Lord is the 
maker of them all.



Footnotes:

{1}  These sermons by the Rev. Charles Kingsley M.A., late rector of 
Eversley and Canon of Westminster, were edited by the Rev. W. Harrison, 
M.A., rector of Brington.--DP.





Back to Full Books